<title>Implementation of remotely operated vehicle for direct inspection of reactor pressure vessel and other water-filled infrastructure</title>
<author>Mingjie Dong, Wusheng Chou, Bin Fang, Guodong Yao & Qingsong Liu</author>
<Affiliation>a.Robotics Institute, Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, XueYuan Road No.37, HaiDian District, Beijing, 100191,
P.R. China; bChina Nuclear Power Technology Research Institute, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518026, P.R. China</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2015.1091395</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2015.1091395</URL>
To reduce the irradiation exposure time of inspection personnel inspecting the reactor pressure vessel and other water-filled infrastructure during overhaul period, a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) is developed to help monitor the underwater environment and salvage small parts like bolts and nuts in the reactor pool and other water-filled infrastructure of the nuclear power plants. It is designed to be compact, light and radiation resistant. The depth control strategy based on fuzzy proportion integration differentiation is proposed for the ROV to suspend at any depth of the reactor pool. And the integrated navigation algorithm based on the Kalman filter fuses data from sensors, including sonar, depth gauge, three-axis accelerometer, three-axis gyroscope and three-axis magnetometer. Radiation testing has been conducted to verify ROV’s ability to work in the reactor pool and other water-filled infrastructure under the environment of high irradiation. Eventually, field experiment was conducted in the reactor simulation pool of the Daya Bay Nuclear Power Plant, and the result verifies the effectiveness of the depth control algorithm, the integrated navigation algorithm and also the leak tightness of the ROV.
Keywords: remotely operated vehicle; reactor pressure vessel; depth control; integrated navigation; radiation testing
1.Introduction
Nuclear energy has drawn more and more atten- tion around the world for its great application prospect. However, the security requirement related to the nuclear power is very high and must be taken seriously, and un- certainty of human factors must be a minimum. That de- mands high-precision robot to replace human to detect the nuclear power plant and complete the correspond- ing operation used to be finished by human workers in order to ensure the safety of nuclear facilities and to pro- tect human from a high irradiation environment. Many robots for nuclear environment have been developed, and remotely operated vehicle (ROV) is just one of them. Recently, many ROVs have been developed for the inspection of dams, [1], ports [2,3], water-filled pipes [4], and some are developed for the nuclear power systems [5], but there is almost no ROV specially designed for inspecting the reactor pressure vessel (RPV) and other
water-filled infrastructure of the nuclear power plants.
The main function of the ROV designed here is to inspect the RPV, which is the core of the nuclear power
generation system. A loose part, whether it is from a failed or weakened component or from an item inad- vertently left in the reactor pool during overhaul time, such as loose metallic parts, bolts, nuts and washers can contribute to component damage and material wear by a frequent impacting with other parts in the system [6]. And it is difficult to get to the outside surface of the RPV because working personnel needs to pass through a very high-radiation area or even stay there for some period of time [7]. The solution to this problem is to research and develop an ROV to replace human workers to inspect the RPV. In recent years, several research projects about underwater robots used for nuclear power plant have been reported. An underwater mobile robot for a loose part detection and removal in the nuclear reactor vessel has been developed by Nuclear Robotics Laboratory in Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, and has been deployed to inspect the loss of Resistance Temperature Detector sensor at the Youngkwang unit 5 in 2004 [6–9]. In Japan, an underwater inspection robot equipped with the array system of eddy current
testing has been developed in order to reduce worker’s radiation exposure and improve inspection-ability in nuclear power plants for some radioactive waste tanks [10]. Lately, an underwater robot for  direct  inspec- tion of nuclear power piping systems is developed to access complex underwater structures and perform non-destructive evaluation, it is untethered, compact, highly maneuverable, and has a smooth body shape with minimal appendages [11]. Mazumdar et al. [12] introduces a new type of spherical underwater robot which is designed for the direct visual inspection of water-filled infrastructure such as the inside of nuclear power plants.
According to the requirements of the ROV used for direct inspection of the RPV and other water-filled in- frastructure, the underwater robot must have very good depth control precision, in other words, the ROV must suspend at any depth of the reactor pool. In recent years, many depth control methods have been proposed, such as proportion integration differentiation (PID) control, neural networks control, sliding model control and so on [13–16]. Different control schemes based on PID and fuzzy techniques are proposed in [17] with their perfor- mances compared. Besides the depth control, the navi- gation to the ROV is also very important. The data from different sensors need to be fused to obtain the precise location and orientation of the ROV. The Kalman filter (KF), extended KF, Unscented KFand complementary filter are the general method for determining the orienta- tion and have been widely used for robot navigation [18– 22]. Our research group also proposes a two-step filter algorithm for attitude estimation of the ROV, using in- ertial/magnetic sensor modules containing orthogonally mounted triads of accelerometers, angular rate sensors and magnetometers, which is robust and superior to the traditional methods in terms of reliability, adaptability and performance [23].
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the system overview of the ROV. Section 3 describes the depth control strategy with simulation. Section 4 re- ports the integrated navigation and location of the ROV. Radiation testing and field experiment are displayed and discussed in Section 5 and Section 6, respectively. Conclusions are drawn in Section 7.
2.System overview
The ROV designed for inspecting the RPV is com- posed of the underwater robot and the control box with a handheld controller, as shown in Figure 1. The two parts are connected using zero buoyancy cable which is 50 meters long and plays an important role in commu- nication and power transmission.
2.1.Underwater robot
The designed and manufactured underwater robot prototype is shown in Figure 2. The robot’s weight is 24 kilograms and its size leaving out the manipulator is
Figure 1. ROV system.
495 mm  425 mm  390 mm (length   width   depth). The basic components contain control cabinet, buoy- ancy module, propellers, camera, manipulator, depth gauge, sonar and so on. The main body frame is made of aluminum alloys to provide sufficient strength and resist to the acidic corrosion of the reactor pool of the nuclear power plant. The control cabinet which is made of thick stainless steel is installed inside the main body frame and it had been done using the double seal pro- cessing to protect the control system inside from water leakage. On the top of the ROV, hollow aluminum alloy buoyancy block is installed to provide buoyancy of the ROV and make the ROV keep neutral buoyancy  when it is out of work with the help of the clump weight, and it can endure enough water pressure and nuclear radia- tion for its metal material. There are four propellers in the ROV with two in the horizontal direction and two in the vertical direction. The two horizontal propellers which are parallel and symmetrical with respect to the center line of the ROV drive the underwater robot for- ward and backward or to rotate in the horizontal plane, while the two vertical propellers drive the robot to rise and descend or suspended in the water.  In the front     of the ROV, an IST-REES irradiation resistant camera with two-freedom PTZ (pan/tilt/zoom) that can provide greater visual angle range, is installed to provide visual
Figure 2. Prototype of the underwater robot.
inspection around the RPV. The IST-REES camera can endure 17.9 KGy/h radiation dose rate and its total dose can be up to 1.66 MGy. Meanwhile, a micromanipula- tor is mounted under the IST-REES camera to salvage small parts like bolts and nuts in the reactor pool of the nuclear power plants. Besides, the ROV is equipped with a variety of sensors, such as sonar, depth gauge, three- axis accelerometer, three-axis gyroscope and three-axis magnetometer, which are used to get the position and attitude of the ROV.
2.2.Control box
The control box of the ROV is composed of the IPC (industrial personal computer), the liquid crystal dis- play (LCD) monitor, two joysticks and some peripheral buttons, as shown in Figure 1. It receives video signal from the camera and ROV’s sensor data which is used to get the parsed position and orientation or depth of the robot. All the data received from the underwater robot are shown in the user interface of the LCD moni- tor. Operators send commands to the underwater robot based on the video information and the sensor data. There are three ways to control the ROV, which are func- tionally equivalent. One way is through the user inter- face, which can display the camera information and the ROV’S position and orientation at the same time, be- yond that, there are many function modules in the user interface which can be used to control the movement or depth of the underwater robot and control the camera with two-freedom PTZ. The second way to control the ROV is through the peripheral buttons and the two joy- sticks in the control box. The speed of the underwater is controlled through the joystick’s angle of inclination. The third way is through the handheld controller, which can only receive the camera information based on the
Figure 3. Structure of the control box.
TCP/IP protocol and control the basic movement and the depth of the underwater. It is small, light and more convenient in the case that the operator can get closer to the reactor pool during the overhaul of the nuclear power plant. The structure of the control box is shown in Figure 3.
The command of the joystick is acquired through analog to digital converter (ADC) of the control unit   in the control box, and the command of buttons is ac- quired through the input port of the control unit. These commands are sent to the underwater robot through the RS485 using IPC as the transfer station. Then, the feed- back information of the underwater robot is sent to the output port of the control unit and display in the form of the light-emitting diode (LED) status, which is also RS485 using IPC as the transfer station. Besides, the im- age of the camera is also transferred to the control box and display in the LCD monitor. The function diagram of the control box is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Function diagram of the control box.
Figure 5. Structure of the drive control system.
2.3.Control system
The control system is composed of the underwater master drive control system inside the control cabinet of the underwater robot and control system inside the con- trol box in the remote control room, the two parts are connected through zero buoyancy cable. As the under- water robot has four propellers and one micromanip- ulator to drive, and needs to collect data from sensors like depth gauge, MEMS (micro electro mechanical sys- tems) accelerometers, MEMS gyroscope, magnetometer and sonar, the structure of the control system is shown in Figure 5.
The master control board receives commands from the control box operated by operators, and sends control signal to the four propellers or the micromanipulator to implement the corresponding movements or operation. All the underwater drive control system inside the con- trol cabinet is coated by thick lead sheet and other radi- ation protection materials to protect it from high radi- ation. Meanwhile, the underwater drive control system collects sensor data and transfers them to the control box for the robot’s navigation and positioning.
3.Depth control strategy
To realize the depth control of the underwater robot in the nuclear power plant, the dynamic equation of the underwater robot system needs to be obtained by an- alyzing the heave motion. However, the hydrodynamic coefficients are difficult to obtain accurately, for under- water robot is a strongly nonlinear system. Besides, the movement coupling between each degree of freedom is difficult to determine quantitatively. So, the mathemati- cal model of the underwater robot cannot be solved ac- curately. Considering that the underwater robot moves slowly in the nuclear power plant and moves only in sin- gle degree direction at a time. Only dominant effects are taken into consideration when solving the mathematical model.
3.1.Mathematical model
The underwater robot is under the effect of the grav- ity, buoyancy, propeller thrust, drag force (represented by G, B, T and R, respectively) and the moments related to these forces. Here, the gravity and the buoyancy are equal for the underwater robot is designed with neutral buoyancy. And the coupling effect between the horizon- tal movement and vertical movement is ignored because the underwater robot moves very slowly for the sake of safety and meets the hypothesis of planar movement. The body coordinate system is shown in Figure 2.
Based on the mathematical model above and New- ton’s second law of motion, we obtain the kinematics Equation (1):
@1where Tz represents the propeller thrust in the heave di- rection and Tzmax 14 N, h represents the depth in the heave direction, m represents the mass of the underwa- ter robot and its value is 24 kg, c represents the drag force coefficients. Since the cable connecting the con- trol box and the underwater robot is absolutely zero buoyance, and the part connected to the robot is fixed
Figure 6. Block diagram of the fuzzy PID controller.
with a certain redundancy, the cable almost has no in- fluence to the robot’s movement, especially in the heave direction. Here, we assume that the drag force mainly comes from water resistance and is proportional to the underwater robot’s speed considering that the underwa- ter robot moves very slowly in the heave direction. The maximum speed of the heave direction is 1 m/s, and the drag force is equal to the propeller thrust when the un- derwater robot moves at a constant speed in the heave direction. Hence, the drag force coefficients can be pre- dicted as Equation (2):@2
Then, we get the transfer function after the Laplace transformation of Equation (1),
@3
Since h(0) and h˙(0) is zero at the beginning of the movement, Equation (3) can be simplified as Equation
(4) with the value of m and c taken into the equation.@4
3.2.Control strategy
Considering that the mathematical model of the un- derwater robot cannot be solved accurately, we design a fuzzy PID controller for the depth control of the under- water robot by using fuzzy reasoning to the self-tuning of the PID parameters to compensate the error caused by the nonlinearity and environmental disturbance, for the fuzzy PID controller does not rely on the accurate mathematical model. The block diagram of the fuzzy PID controller is shown in Figure 6.
Where R(t) is the expected depth value, e represents the deviation between the expected depth value and the
feedback depth value from the depth gauge, ec repre- sents the deviation variation rate, u(t) represents the out- put voltage to the two vertical propellers, and y(t) repre- sents the actual depth values. And kp, ki , kd are three PID gain parameters need to be adjusted using fuzzy reasoning.
During the depth control, E and EC are the input of the fuzzy reasoning which is e andecafter fuzzification, respectively, and kp, ki , kd are the outputs of the fuzzy reasoning, which will be send to the PID controller to adjust the output u(t).
3.3Fuzzy control rule
The membership function of the input and output are defined as Figure 7 according to the actual underwa- ter environment, where NB, NM, NS, PE, PS, PM, PB represent negative big, negative medium, negative small, zero, positive small, positive medium and positive big, respectively.
The fuzzy rules is as Table 1 according to the effect that kp, ki , kd have on the output characteristic of the system and the practical manipulation experience. Fi- nally, we use the method of weighted mean to the process defuzzification.
Figure 7. Membership function.
Table 1. Fuzzy rules.
Simulation
Combining the transfer function in the heave di- rection of the underwater robot with the fuzzy PID control strategy, we simulate the underwater robot in MATLAB using the Simulink module. In order to test the performance of the fuzzy PID controller, we use a classic PID controller as a comparison. The simulation result is shown in Figure 8. Meanwhile, in order to detect its anti-interference ability, the white noise with variance value 0.05 is added in 20 seconds, and the simulation re- sult is shown in Figure 9.
The simulation result shows that the fuzzy PID con- troller has rapid response and low overshoot. When the interference signal is added, the fuzzy PID controller can reach the stable state much earlier, which shows that the fuzzy PID controller has better stability performance and stronger anti-interference ability and is more suit- able for the depth control of the ROV.
4.Integration navigation and location
There is uncertainty in the data measured by sen- sors, because every sensor has its own characteristics, and usually describes the measured object in a cer-
tain range or a particular aspect, and in the meantime, the sensors is vulnerable to the effects of interference noise. That is to say, the data obtained from the sen- sors are inaccurate, incomplete or not reliable. So fil- ter and data fusion is of vital importance to coordi- nate and complement the data from different sensors to improve the accuracy and robustness of the navigation system.
The navigation sensors of the ROV include depth gauge, three-axis accelerometer, three-axis gyroscope, three-axis magnetometer and sonar. The depth gauge can directly measure the depth of the underwater robot. The navigation position measurement unit composed  of three-axis accelerometer, three-axis gyroscope and three-axis magnetometer can get the three-dimensional attitude of the underwater robot through a two-step fil- ter algorithm [23]. Sonar can measure the relative po- sition between the underwater robot and the pool wall. Meanwhile, we can determine whether the underwater robot is moving or not through the horizontal position information from the three-axis accelerometer and the course angle data from the navigation position mea- surement unit. If the underwater robot is judged to be moving, we can compensate the sonar distortion caused
Figure 8.    Simulation without interference.	Figure 9. Simulation with interference at 20 seconds.
Figure 10. Algorithm of the integrated navigation.
by robot’s moving using these two  information, and  get the absolute position of the underwater robot in two-dimensional planar through probabilistic iterative correspondence. Finally, the information of each unit is filtered to get the three-dimensional positioning of theunderwater robot. The flow chart of the integrated nav- igation algorithm is shown in Figure 10.
The state equation and the measurement equation  of the underwater robot are as Equations (5) and (6), respectively,@5
@6
where  Xk	yk
zk
is the state variables of three-
xsk, ysk are the positions calculated through sonar, zsk is the depth measurement from depth gauge,  k,k−1   is the state-transition matrix which is defined as the identity matrix here. And Ck−1 is the attitude matrix at time (k 1), dk−1 is the relative distance calculated through quadratic integral of the acceleration obtained
from the accelerometers, Hk is the measurement ma- trix which is defined as the identity matrix here too, Wk−1 and Vk are the process noise and observation noise, which are both assumed as white Gaussian noises with zero-mean.
The KF is used to fuse and filter the data from sen- sors to obtain the three-dimensional position of the un- derwater robot precisely, the process of the algorithm is as Equations (7)–(11).@7
@8
@9
@10
@11
where  Xˆ k−1  = [xˆk−1 yˆk−1 zˆk−1]T     is  the  estimated  state variables, Kk is the KF gain, Qk−1 is the system noise variance, Rk is the measurement noise variance.
However, magnetometer is vulnerable to outside in- terference, especially in the nuclear environment. So, the navigation algorithm under the condition of the magne- tometer failure requires special consideration to guaran-tee the normal work of the entire navigation system. As
we know, the measurement data from magnetometer will ference, in which circumstances we consider that faults occur to the magnetometer and the measurement data from the magnetometer cannot be used anymore.
Whether the magnetometer works normally or not is judged through calculating the variance of the mea- surement data from the magnetometer within fixed time period. The variance σm is within a certain threshold when the magnetometer works normally, nevertheless, the variance σmwill vary considerably when the magnetic interference is large enough to cause the fault of the mag- netometer. That is as Equation (12).@12
where σt represents the threshold value of the variance. At first, the relative course angle is obtained through short-time integral of the gyroscope as the course
Figure 11. Integration navigation with magnetic interference.
angle cannot be estimated through the two-step filter al- gorithm when fault occurs to the magnetometer. Then the relative distance is obtained through quadratic inte- gral of the acceleration from the accelerometer to com- pensate the sonar image. And the course angle in the absolute coordinate system is obtained by matching the sonar image and  the  environment  map.  Eventually, the three-dimensional position is estimated through the position filter combined with the kinematics model of the ROV. The flow chart of the algorithm is shown in Figure 11.
5.Radiation testing
The ROV designed for the nuclear power plant is used for inspecting the RPV and other water-filled in- frastructure, and to salvage small parts like bolts and nuts in the reactor pool. Therefore, the ROV must be able to work under the high irradiation environment. Since the ROV is only used during overhaul of the nuclear power plant, which is about once a year and a half, and it needs to work three to four hours during each over- haul. The ROV must ensure that it can work normally for at least eight hours, if we replace the robot parts every three years. Therefore, we conducted the radia- tion test on the ROV in Suzhou CNNC (The China Na- tional Nuclear Corporation) Huadong Radiation Co., Ltd, Suzhou, China from 4 to 5 February 2015 with ir- radiation dose rate up to 100 Gy/h which is much higher than the actual irradiation dose rate during the over- haul. Since the underwater robot is made in mental ma- terial except the control cabinet, which contains the con- trol module and driver module of electric motor from the four propellers and the micromanipulator with many semiconductor materials inside, we conducted the irra- diation test using the control cabinet, for we all know that semiconductor materials are more vulnerable to ra- diation than metal. In other words, the control cabinet’s
Figure 12. On-site irradiation test.
normal work time under high irradiation environment determines the maximum work time of the designed ROV.
5.1.Irradiation test method
The purpose of the test is to verify whether the con- trol cabinet can work normally for 10 hours under high irradiation environment with irradiation dose rate up to 100 Gy/h. The underwater master drive control system inside the control cabinet is in the running state during the irradiation test, the control cabinet used for the ir- radiation test is exactly the same as the control cabinet installed in the ROV as we made several alternatives, and the control system’s running program is just the program the ROV works underwater. The on-site photo is shown in Figure 12.
The position with dose rate up to 100 Gy was found before the irradiation test, at the same time, five ra- diometers were installed on the control cabinet with four
outside and one inside to obtain the actual dose rate dur- ing the irradiation process. Seven key signals including four control signals to the four propellers and three key voltage signals were captured using a microcontroller to monitor whether the system worked well or not through cables for the reason that operators cannot enter the ir- radiation environment to measure by themselves for the high irradiation.
The four control signals were generated according to the commands from the control box with limit range of 5V, and changed with the change of the control com- mands. They were produced according to certain control algorithm after the control panel received the control commands. The produced control signals had the simi- lar trends with the control commands which is the zigzag wave. Beyond that, three key voltage signals, including 3.3, 5 and 12 V voltages on the control panel were also monitored to have a more comprehensive monitoring of
the control system in the irradiation environment.
The above seven voltage signals were sampled by a 12 bit ADC acquisition system through different AFE (analog front end). The sampled data were displayed in real time and saved on the PC interface. The test time was from 17:00 on 4 February 2015 to 3:00 on 5 Febru- ary 2015 with total time 10 hours.
5.2.Irradiation test results
In the test, every channel has its own conversion for- mula between the sample values and the actual volt- age value because of their different AFE. The conver- sion formula of channel 1 to 4 which means four control signals to the four propellers, respectively, is shown in Equation (13), the conversion formula of channel 5 to  7 which means three key voltage signals including 3.3, 5 and 12V voltages on the control panel is shown in Equa- tions (14)–(16), respectively.@13
@14
@15
@16
where Vs is the actual voltage value, s is the sample value
and s0 is the initial zero bias for the corresponding chan- nel. The signals of the above two time points after con- version are shown in Figures 13 and 14, respectively.
Results show that the sampling signals have the simi- lar trends with the control commands which is the zigzag wave and the key voltages are stable, which verify that the control system works normally and stably during this period of time.Figure 13. Signals after conversion at the beginning of the test.
Figure 14. Signals after conversion at the end of the test.
6.Field experiment and result
In order to test the motion performance of the ROV, we conduct the field experiment in the reactor simulation pool of the Daya Bay Nuclear Power Plant, Shenzhen,China, which is the same as the reactor pool in size with its length, width and depth nearly 20, 10 and 20 meters,respectively. The field experiment lasted for more than two hours. Field test photo is shown in Figure 15.
During the field experiment, we tested  the  cam-  era and the micromanipulator completing the under-water video capture and salvaged a small bolt. But the most important is that the motion performance of the ROV was tested combined with integrated navigation and depth control. The experiment data were displayed on the interface of the LCD monitor synchronously and all the test data were saved automatically. We assume that the surface of the pool is the X–Y plane, the straight down is the Z-axis. And the underwater robot was controlled to do uniform rectilinear motion along the Figure 15. Field experiment.
Figure 16. Field experiment of the motion performance, where “exp-” represents the experiment data and “sim-” rep- resents the simulation data.
diagonal of the pool. Part of the field test results are shown in Figure 16..
From the result of the field  experiment,  we  can see that the curve of x-axis and y-axis is smooth, and changes in a nearly linear fashion, which indicates that the ROV was moving in a straight line stably. The dif- ference between the experiment data and the simula- tion data is very small, which indicates the performance of the proposed integrated navigation algorithm is very good. Besides, the z-axis is basically horizontal with variance 0.0097, which indicates that the ROV ran in a horizontal plane, and also verifies the effectiveness of the depth control algorithm. Long time deep-water experi- ment also verifies the leak tightness of the ROV.
7.Conclusion
A ROV with all components made of metal materi- als has been developed for inspecting the RPV and other water-filled infrastructure in the nuclear power plant. It is compact, light and radiation resistant. The integrated
navigation algorithm and the control strategy, especially the depth control algorithm have been studied in detail. Then the radiation testing has been conducted under the high radiation environment with radiation dose rate up to 100 Gy/h, which verifies that the ROV can work nor- mally for about twice of the overhaul time of the nuclear power plant. Field experiment conducted in the reactor simulation pool of the Daya Bay Nuclear Power Plant verifies the effectiveness of the depth control algorithm and the integrated navigation algorithm and also veri- fies the tightness of the ROV. All of the above show that the ROV designed has the ability of working in the reac- tor pool to inspect the RPV in the nuclear power plant. More stability and robustness experiments will be car- ried out, and the ROV will be applied to the nuclear power plant in the near future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Natural National Key Basic Research Program of China [grant number 2013CB035503], China domestic research project for the International Thermonuclear Experiment Reactor [grant number 2012GB102006], and the National High Technology Re- search and Development Program of China [grant number 2011AA040201].
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
