<title>Pre and post operative radiation protection in Ru-106 brachytherapy ophthalmic plaque surgery and related material shielding properties</title>
<author>Simone Busoni, Luca Fedeli, Giacomo Belli, Elisabetta Genovese, Vittorio Cannatà,
Cesare Gori, Francesco Rossi</author>
<Affiliation>a.A.O.U.  Careggi,  Firenze,  Italy;b.Università  degli  Studi  di  Firenze,  Firenze,  Italy;
c.Ospedale  Pediatrico  Bambino  Gesù,  Roma,  Italy</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Physica Medica</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ejmp.2018.11.003</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2018.11.003</URL>
ABSTRACT
Pre and post-operative exposure levels of medical staff and people from public in intra-operative Ru-106 oph- thalmic brachytherapy are reported, together with attenuation properties of selected shielding materials. In particular radiation exposure of workers during plaque transportation and during medical assistance of im- planted plaque patient was measured. Taking into account dose rates and considering standard assistance procedure of hospitalized patients, the exposure of medical staff and people of the public were evaluated for a given workload.
In order to provide tools to optimize radiation protection, considering social and economic aspects due to possible hospital discharge or hospital stay, the attenuation properties of common shielding materials (lead, concrete, red brick, PMMA and gypsum) were measured, considering both narrow and broad beam setups. The eye was simulated using a water equivalent phantom and plaque was fixed on it. All measurements were per- formed with calibrated survey meters. Results were compared with numerical simulation of bremsstrahlung X- ray radiation spectra emitted from patient eye.
Exposure levels measured at 1 m distance in front of the implanted eye are 0.05 µSv/h/MBq, at 10 cm from patient head, 0.44 µSv/h/MBq (plaque side), 0.4 µSv/h/MBq (front), 0.25 µSv/h/MBq (lateral, opposed to plaque), 0.2 µSv/h/MBq (back).
Average exposure levels, under conservative assumptions, for medical staff is 17 µSv/patient and less than    23 µSv/patient for careers and comforters. TVLs in lead and concrete are about 1.6 cm and 11.5 cm respectively.
Keywords:
106Ru brachytherapy
106Ru radiation protection
106Ru attenuation materials properties
1.Introduction
The use of 106Ru/106Rh (106Ru in the following) plaque was in- troduced in 1964 for choroidal melanomas therapy [1] nowadays is adopted in both LDR and HDR brachytherapy [2–6]. The radioisotope emits β radiation with an end-point energy of 3.5 MeV [7] and X-γ rays of energy between 0.5 and 1.6 MeV [8]. The plaque is like a stainless steel contact lens, with lateral holes for the surgical implantation. On the convex part of the plaque a thin layer of the isotope is deposed.
Considered technique is based on the surgical implantation of the plaque directly on the eye of the patient, on the side where the treat- ment is needed. Plaque remains implanted and is surgically removed after a therapeutic suitable time, defined by medical staff in advance, (usually few days). Patient may undergo clinical recovery or may be dismissed during the implantation period, depending on clinical
conditions and local hospital protocols.
While data of surgeon exposure during surgery and patient dose are available [9,10] there is lack of data with respect to exposure rates of workers and people from public in pre and post-operative phase.
The aim the of present study is to consider, in a typical clinical scenario, occupational workers and public exposure levels and to evaluate shielding properties of commonly used materials. Data are required in order to optimize radiation protection, considering social and economic aspects due to possible patient hospital discharge or re- covery, and to guarantee not to exceed exposure limits of workers and public (ICRP [11], IAEA BSS [12] and COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 2013/59/ EURATOM [13]).
Exposure levels close to implanted patients and close to container were evaluated for caregivers and medical staff, in particular the dose to nurses involved in surgical rooms or in patient care during the
clinical recovery, paramedical dedicated to plaque transportation and other professionals close to the patient during the recovery.
Moreover, laboratory measurements were performed on selected materials to evaluate their attenuation properties and build-up factors. Numerical simulation of X-γ and Bremsstrahlung (BS) spectrum, gen- erated from beta radiation of 106Ru in eye, was performed and results are compared both with in vivo and laboratory measurements.
Maximum number of treated patients not to exceed public exposure limits is provided, considering typical plaque activity and reasonable recovery procedure.
2.Materials and methods
106Ru plaques are spherically shaped, with the inner radius of cur- vature ranging from 12 mm to 14 mm, and their diameter varying be- tween 11.6 mm and 25.4 mm, different shapes are available, depending from specific clinical therapy. The active material is deposited on a
0.7 mm pure silver bulk and covered with 0.1 mm of pure silver. Plaque nominal activity varies between 5 MBq and 50 MBq. Shipping box is a Type A package, UN 2910 (according to international ADR protocol) with transportation index of 0.1. As for intra-hospital transportation a dedicated shielding cylindrical multilayer steel box, that may be used for plaque sterilisation, is provided by manufacturer. In Fig. 1 a sketch of the considered plaque is shown.
In order to optimize radiation protection, two different workers exposure conditions were considered: during plaque transportation and close to patient with implanted plaque. Numerical simulation of dose rate from BS and x-γ radiation was also performed and compared with measurements around patient with implanted plaque.
Characterization of radiation shielding properties of BS and x-γ ra- diation was performed considering several common attenuation layers and experimental results were compared with numerical simulation.
2.1.Occupational and public exposure in pre and post surgery phase
In vivo measurements were performed on nine implanted patients. Five  different  positions  around  patient  head  were  considered.  In  par- ticular  Plaque  side  refers  to  the  side  of  the  head  closest  to  eye  with implanted   plaque,   Front   is   in   front   of   the   eye   with   the   plaque, Contralateral is opposed to Plaque side, Nape is opposed to Front, and Top is  above  the  head,  distances  from  patient  skin  were  of  10  and  50 cm. Nominal plaque activity varied from 6.8 and 36 MBq, dose rates were normalized to plaque activity. All measurements were performed with a calibrated ionization chamber (Victoreen 451, Fluke Corp.,WA, USA).
Intra-hospital plaque transportation is performed employing the manufacturer package, that is a multi-layer cylindrical box (external diameter and height of 10 cm). Inner layer is made of a plastic container (3.5 cm diameter and height); a second layer is made of aluminium
(5 mm thick). The external layer is made of stainless steel (10 mm thick)
Aluminum container Spring
Stainless steel package
Fig. 2. Scheme of 106Ru plaque transportation package.
and contains a special holder (spring) to avoid aluminium container movements. In addition, the box comes with a removable handle that blocks the cap, preventing from accidentally opening the container; in Fig. 2 a schematic representation of package is reported.
Manufacturer recommends to put eye plaque into the aluminium container with the concave side (radiation window) facing downward to reduce radiation exposure.
Radiation dose rate measurements around transportation package were performed considering different plaque orientation inside the container. Dose rate measurement were performed with a dose rate detector (Automesse SZINTOMAT 6134); before the measurement, de- tector response was verified using an high-activity (20 MBq) 90Sr beta calibration source. Dose rate was measured considering a plaque with nominal activity of 6.8 MBq, and a distance up to 100 cm in several directions (side and top).
A custom code (developed with Mathematica 9.0, Wolfram Champaign, IL USA) was written to perform numerical simulation of the BS spectrum; beta energy spectrum of 106Ru was taken from [1]. Photon BS spectrum generated from eye (considered as a 25 mm dia- meter sphere) was calculated. BS appropriate cross-section was con- sidered [14] and electron continuous slowing down approximation (CSDA) was used; spectrum normalization was performed using radia- tion yield tables [15].
The exposure rates were estimated using the Flux-to-Dose-Rate conversion function [16] and attenuation of selected materials (lead and concrete) was calculated.
Considering a monochromatic electron with kinetic energy T0,
passing through some material and emitting X-ray BS, the emitted photons spectrum, was:
@1
where N is number of Avogadro, A is the atomic mass of the medium crossed, reff is the effective range of the electron in the medium, is the material density and d k (k, T0) is the Bremsstrahlung cross-section. Considering CSDA, the value of reff can be determinate from the ra-
diation yield ye (listed in [15]):
@2
calculated as
@3
EM is the end-point energy of the beta spectrum and   (T0) is the probability	distribution	function	of	beta	spectrum	(i.e. EM      (x)dx	1). Full spectrum was calculated considering both the BS and X-gamma radiation of 106Ru contribution. Eye attenuation was considered in order to determinate the correct dose rate, in particular BS spectrum was highly filtered from eye itself.Full spectrum is:
@4
where µ (k) is the attenuation coefficient of the eye (considered as water) relative to photon energy k, listed in [15], d is the diameter of the eye (25 mm), BRi is the branching ratio of the i-th X-ray (or gamma- ray) emitted from 106Ru (and ki its energy) [8], is  the  Dirac-δ.  In radiation protection, dose rate is considered, rather than photon flux, conversion was performed using Flux-to-Dose-Rate conversion function
(10)) at distance d from radiation source and attenuated from a thick- ness x of material.
Considering above formalism, half vale layer (HVL) and tenth vale layer (TVL) were calculated as (the choice of d is arbitrary):
f (k) [16]. The dose rate after layer attenuation of thickness x, was
@5
where Sref is the reference surface (1 cm2) and eye (d) is the dose rate (in Hp(10)) at distance d from eye along the plaque-eye direction.
2.2.Materials attenuation properties
Material shielding properties were measured following IEC 61331- 1:2014 [17] protocol, in particular both narrow and broad beam mode were considered. HVL and TVL were measured for five selected mate- rials (lead (Pb), concrete, red brick, PMMA and gypsum). Measure- ments were performed simulating the eye with a 25 mm diameter plastic sphere, filled with water and the plaque attached on it. The plaque had an activity of 35.15 MBq. Detection limit (DL) were eval- uated according to [18], using a truncated Gaussian distribution and considering the uncertainties propagation as described in [19] with 95% of confidence level (CL); only measurements above DL were con- sidered. In Fig. 3 the experimental setup used for attenuation mea- surements is outlined. HVLs and TVLs were calculated considering mono exponential attenuation law and, for lead and concrete, results
Fig. 3. Experimental setup for attenuation measurement (not in scale): (1) plaque, (2) eye phantom, (3) lead diaphragms, (4) attenuation layer, (5) de- tector.
were compared with numerical simulation. Build up factors are re-ported.Measurements were performed with a calibrated ionization chamber (Victoreen 451, Fluke Corp., WA, USA) and a portable spec-
trometer (IdentiFINDER-2, Flir Systems Inc., OR, USA) equipped with a 35 mm diameter × 51 mm length NaI (Tl) detector.
Using the same formalism as in previous section, dose rate after layer attenuation of thickness x, can be determinated:
@6
where Sref is the reference surface (1 cm2), µmat is the attenuation coefficient of attenuation layer[15] and (d, x) is the dose rate (in Hp (10)) at distance d from radiation source and attenuated from a thick- ness x of material.
Considering above formalism, half vale layer (HVL) and tenth vale layer (TVL) were calculated as (the choice of d is arbitrary):
@7
3.Results
The  average  exposure  levels  ( ± SD)  were  measured  around  nine patients  head  are  reported  in  Table  1;  values  are  normalized  to  unit activity  (µSv/h/MBq).  Five  positions  around  the  head,  at  10 cm  dis- tance from the skin, are considered, plus two positions at 1 m. Plaque side refers to the side of the head closest to eye with implanted plaque, Front is in front of the eye with the plaque, Contralateral is opposed to Plaque side, Nape  is opposed to Front, and Top  is above the head.
Table 2 shows the exposure levels measured around the different containers, both plastic and transportation package. These levels are nearly constant for any given direction and plaque orientation inside plastic package. During transportation, worker hands are about 10 cm away from stainless steel container, and considering a typical plaque activity of 25 MBq, exposure rate was 15 μSv/h.
In Table 3 numerical simulation of dose rate in Hp(10), normalised to 1 MBq plaque activity and at a reference distance of 1 m from patient, considering both BS generated from eye and 106Ru X-γ rays is reported. Attenuation, considering two thicknesses of typical shielding materials (0.2 cm lead and 10 cm concrete), is also included. The Eye Front column refers to the dose rate calculated with the attenuation of the eye alone; Pb and Concrete refer to the dose rates after the attenuation of the eye and a shielding of 0.2 cm of lead and 10 cm of concrete respectively. First row shows dose rates from BS only, second row shows dose rates from X-γ radiation, the last one represents total dose rate (sum of the previous two rows).
Transmission measurements, in narrow and broad beam condition and as a function of attenuation layer thickness, were fitted using a mono exponential function (R2 > 0.95 for all considered materials (concrete, red brick, lead, PMMA and gypsum)).
HVLs and TVLs are reported in Table 4, for the five considered at- tenuation materials; lead and concrete attenuation properties are compared with numerical simulation, showing good agreement within experimental uncertain.
In particular in Fig. 4 exposure rate transmission (measurements: blue points, simulated data: solid blue line) as a function of the at- tenuation layer thickness for lead is reported. In Fig. 5 exposure rate transmissions (measured results, red points and simulated data, dashed red line), considering concrete, was reported. Error bars are one SD in both figures.
Considering measurements uncertainties, transmission DL is 0.09, consequently values below this threshold are not statistically different from the background at a CL of 95%.
Build up factor are reported in Table 5, considering different ma- terials and thickness. Build up factors range between 1.2 and 1.4 at one
Table 1
Normalized exposure levels around patient head (µSv/h/MBq).
Table 2
Normalized transportation exposure levels (µSv/h/MBq).
Table 3
Dose rate in Hp(10) at 1 m from radiation source (simulated results).
Table 4
Materials attenuation properties (narrow beam).
Fig. 4. Exposure rate transmission (measurements: blue points, simulated data: solid blue line) as a function of the attenuation layer thickness for lead. Error bars are one SD; Detection Limit (DL) is 0.9 (dashed-dotted black line). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
HVL thickness, and between 2.1 and 2.8 at one TVL material thickness. Simulated eye attenuated 106Ru spectrum is reported in Fig. 6 (solid blue line), considering both contributions from BS and X-gamma ray. Attenuation considering two thicknesses of typical shielding materials (0.2 cm lead, dashed red line, and 10 cm concrete, dotted-dashed green)
Fig. 5. Exposure rate transmission (measurements: red points, simulated data: dashed red line) as a function of the attenuation layer thickness for concrete. Error bars are one SD; Detection Limit (DL) is 0.9 (dashed-dotted black line). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Table 5
BUILD-UP FACTORS.
is also included. The deep hollow around 90 keV in the lead attenuated spectrum is due to K-shell absorption. Larger contribution to total dose rate derives from X-γ rays, rather than from BS radiation.
4.Discussion
BS radiation represents a well know radioprotection issue when dealing with beta emitting radionuclides. In this study, both experi- mental measurements and simulations, taking into account BS radiation generated by 106Ru in water, were performed and results were com- pared.
Considering a 25 MBq plaque activity, measurements at 10 cm apart from skin surface of the head of patient show a dose rate of the order of 11 µSv/h in front and on the plaque side; dose rates lower than 6.5 µSv/ h were measured in other position around patient. One meter distance dose rate is below to 0.8 µSv/h.
Considering a 25 MBq plaque activity, measurements around transportation container indicate a 15 μSv/h  dose  rate  emission  at  10 cm and 3.3 μSv/h at 50 cm. Typical transportation time varies be- tween a few minutes to half hour for each patient.
With the plaque in clinical use (i.e. implanted on the eye) the
Fig. 6. Simulated results of 106Ru full spectra, including the X-γ and the Bremsstrahlung radiation generated from the eye (solid blue line). Attenuation considering two thicknesses of typical shielding materials (0.2 cm lead, dashed red line, and 10 cm concrete, dotted-dashed green) is also included. (For in- terpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is re- ferred to the web version of this article.)
dominant contribution to dose rate derives from high-energy X-γ ra- diation (between 0.5 MeV and 1.6 MeV), BS contribution to total dose
rate  is lower  than 5%.  Simulated dose rate  and in  vivo measurement
particular lead TVL is 1.6 cm, concrete and red brick TVL are of the order 10 cm, larger values were obtained for PMMA (22 cm) and gypsum (37 cm).
Build-up factors were calculated for the above considered five ma- terials, values ranging between 1.2 and 1.4 considering one HVL thickness, and between 2.1 and 2.8 at one TVL thickness; results are in agreement with data found in literature for concrete [20]. Lead and concrete narrow beam laboratory measurements are in agreement with numerical simulation within 10%. Proposed BS spectrum simulation may be extended to different materials and beta sources.
5.Conclusions
In this study in vivo exposure measurements around patient with 106Ru implanted plaque were performed. Considering a conservative clinical setup (i.e. large recovery and assistance times), a single worker assisting all annual hospitalized patients and a typical activity of the implanted plaques of 25 MBq, up to 60 patients may be treated in a year, without exceeding dose threshold of 1 mSv/y.
For the same number of patients, considering a person who works in office next to recovery room (i.e. a 8 h/day standing at 1.5 m from the patient bed), the received dose was around 0.65 mSv/y.
In the before mentioned scenario, received effective dose during plaque transportation was lower than 100 µSv/y and hand dose lower than 0.5 mSv.
As for exposure of the public (e.g. patient relatives, standing three days at 1 m from plaque implanted eye) it is not relevant from a ra- diation protection point of view (i.e. lower than 30 µSv).
Agreement between laboratory measurements and numerical si- mulation of 106Ru BS spectrum generated from beta particles in plaque implanted eye was found. Larger contribution to radiation dose rate was from X-γ ray, BS contribution to total radiation is below 5% in all
difference is the order of 10%.
considered scenarios.
In synthesis, the use of
106Ru plaque for ophthalmic treatments,
4.1.Occupational and public exposure in pre and post surgery phase
In the following, a reasonable clinical scenario is considered and a plaque activity of 25 MBq is assumed.
Considering a worker (e.g. nurse) who assists hospitalized patients three times in a day, for 10 min for each operation, standing at 30 cm apart from patient, and a recovery time of three days for each implant, the effective dose is around 17 µSv/pt. Required not to exceed an an- nual exposure limit of 1 mSv/y effective dose, a single worker is al- lowed to assist around 60 patients.
In the same hypothesis, the annual dose for people standing at 1.5 m from a patient, for 8 h in a day (e.g. worker in an office next to patient room, neglecting the wall shielding), considering 60 patients in a year, each one hospitalized for three days, is around 0.65 mSv/y. For people of the public, considering a conservative total amount of 24 h spent around the patient at 1 m, during three implanted days, total exposure is around 23 µSv.
Dose rate at 50 cm from transportation container is about 3.3 µSv/h. Assuming a total transportation time of half hour for each patient, and a total of 60 patients in a year, the total dose of a worker who transport the plaque is less than 100 µSv/y (considering a conservative distance from the plaque of 50 cm during all transportation time).
4.2.Materials attenuation properties
In order to provide the reader a tool to calculate the required shielding thickness under different conditions, shielding properties were evaluated for five commonly used materials: lead, concrete, red brick, PMMA and gypsum. According to international standards (IEC 61331-1) both narrow and broad beam attenuation measurement were considered: HVLs, TVLs and build-up factors were calculated. In
considering a workload up to about 60 patients/year and the afore mentioned exposure time assumptions, does not require specific ra- diation protection shielding or dose reduction procedures in pre and post-operative phases, for both medical staff and people from public.
Acknowledgments
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
