<title>Experimental and Monte Carlo simulation study on  potential new	 composite materials to moderate neutron-gamma radiation</title>
<author>Bünyamin Aygün a,*, Erdem S¸ akar b, V.P. Singh c, M.I. Sayyed d, e, Turgay Korkut f,
Abdulhalik Karabulut g</author>
<Affiliation>a  Department of Electronics and Automation, Vocational School, A˘grı I˙brahim Çeçen University, A˘grı, Turkey
b Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Atatürk University, 25240, Erzurum, Turkey
c Department of Physics, Karnatak University, Dharwad, India
d Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Isra University, Amman, Jordan
e Department of Nuclear Medicine Research, Institute for Research and Medical Consultations, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Damman, Saudi Arabia
f Department of Nuclear Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Sinop University, Sinop, Turkey
g  Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Atatürk University, 25240, Erzurum, And A˘grı I˙brahim Çeçen University, A˘grı, Turkey</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103538</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103538</URL>
ABSTRACT
In this study, 12 different concentrations of shielding materials were developed and produced. They  were  covered with high temperature resistant (1500 ◦C) sodium silicate sealing paste. Epoxy resin was produced by adding different percentages of additive materials such as chromium oxide (Cr2O3), lithium (LiF), and nickel  oxide (NiO). The GEANT4 and FLUKA codes of the Monte Carlo simulation toolkit were used to determine the mixing ratios. The total macroscopic cross-sections, effective removal cross-sections, mean free path, half value layer, and transmission neutron number were determined for fast neutron radiation using GEANT4 and FLUKA
simulation codes. The mass attenuation coefficient, the effective atomic number and half-value layer (HVL) of the samples were calculated using Phy-X/PSD software. The absorbed dose was measured. In this study, an 241Am–Be neutron source with 74 GBq activity and average neutron energy of approximately 4.5 MeV and a BF3 gas de- tector were used. Both simulation and experimental measurements were compared with paraffin and conven-
tional concrete. The new composite shielding material absorbed radiation much better than the reference materials. This new radiation shielding composite material can be used in nuclear medicine, transport and storage of radioactive waste, nuclear power plants, and as a shielding material for neutron and gamma radiation.
Keywords:
Neutron and gamma radiation Epoxy
GEANT4 FLUKA
Phy-X/PSD
Shielding metal oxide
Credit author statement
Bünyamin Aygün: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Erdem S¸ akar: Data curation, Writing - original draft. V. P. Singh: Visu- alization, Investigation. M.I. Sayyed: Writing- Reviewing and Editing, Turgay Korkut: Software, Validation, Abdulhalik Karabulut: Supervision.
1.Introduction
Radiation is used in electricity generation, medicine, research (mine, oil, space, geology, archaeology, agriculture, and military), and in- dustry. If adequate safety precautions are not taken when using radia- tion, particularly ionizing radiation (neutron, gamma and X-ray), it can
harm living cells and their genetic material (DNA) (Azman et al., 2019). Thus, radiation safety is very important for both human life and the environment. Shielding material should be used according to the type and energy of the radiation to ensure radiation safety. For example, materials containing abundant hydrogen and boron are used against neutrons, while materials with high atomic numbers such as lead are used against gamma radiation. Many different materials are used to shield radiation, such as heavy concrete (Aygün et al., 2019), (Demir et al., 2020), (S¸ ensoy and Go¨kçe, 2020), stainless steel (Aygün, 2019), (Alım et al., 2020), alloys (S¸ akar et al., 2019), (Alım, 2020), (S¸ akar, 2020) glasses (Rammah et al., 2020), (Singh et al., 2018), (Sayyed et al., 2018), (Hassib et al., 2019), (Vighnesh et al., 2020), (Wagh et al., 2019), (Singh et al., 2014), (Kaewkhao et al., 2017), polymers (Aygün et al., 2015), (Abdalsalam et al., 2019), (Abdalsalam et al., 2020) and new
organic chemicals (for neutrons) (Aygün et al., 2020). Low density, nontoxic, and high mechanical and corrosion strength shielding mate- rials are demanded in shielding research.
Polymer-based lightweight samples are commonly used for radiation shielding applications because they have excellent corrosion and me- chanical strength, biological, and chemical properties. Polymers used for radiation shielding must be reinforced by doping certain metals, metal oxides, and chemical compounds.
Some polymers such as epoxy resin, ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE), polyacrylic acid, and unsaturated polyesters are used as radiation shielding materials (Kaloshkin et al., 2012) (Erol et al., 2016) (Barabash et al., 2019). Polymers have high ratios of hydrogen elements, so they are used for neutron radiation protection because neutrons are more likely to interact with hydrogen (Sundar    et al., 1996). Polymers are not effective against gamma radiation, but if strengthened with high-density metal such as wolfram carbide and boron carbide, they can also be used for neutron and gamma shielding (Li et al., 2019). (Kaçal et al., 2019) investigated the gamma and neutron attenuation properties of eight different polymers: polyamide (Nylon 6) (PA-6), polyacrylonitrile (PAN), polyvinylidene chloride (PVDC), poly- aniline (PANI), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyphenylene sulfide (PPS), polypyrrole (PPy), and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). Accord- ing to their studies; when the polymers examined were evaluated together, it was reported that PTFE polymer with the highest density and PA6 polymer with the highest H abundance had better gamma and neutron absorption capabilities, respectively, compared to other poly- mers. Among various polymers, epoxy resins are very useful radiation shielding materials due to their good mechanical properties, high resistance to chemicals, excellent adhesion to various substrates, and high stability. However, these must be strengthened with various ma- terials depending on the type of radiation. The use of nano- and micro-sized particles in the production of a material also affects the material’s ability to protect from nuclear radiation. As the particle size gets smaller in nano materials, the number of atoms per volume in- creases. There are more atoms in nano material than microstructure in the same size field. In nuclear shield studies, absorption occurs when incoming radiation hits the atoms of the material. The more atoms in the area of interaction, the better the absorption will take place (Soltani    et al., 2016). Many epoxy-based shielding samples have been developed.
WO3/epoxy resin samples were  prepared with nano and micro particle
sizes by solidification. The linear and mass attenuation coefficients were calculated for gamma radiation at 1172 and 1332 keV. A nanoscale W03/epoxy sample was the best gamma radiation absorbing material (Ali et al., 2018). Epoxy resin matrix composite samples were produced using micro and nano gadolinium oxide (Gd2O3) particles. The gamma radiation mass attenuation coefficients were measured at photon en- ergies from 31 keV to 356 keV. Adding Gd2O3 particles increases the mass attenuation coefficients of the samples (Li et al., 2017). A new type of neutron shielding material was developed by adding colemanite based on epoxy resin and its neutron shielding ability was tested. The new sample’s shielding capacity was better than concrete and poly- ethylene combined with 10 wt% boron oxide (Okuno, 2005). The neutron radiation protection properties of neat epoxy resin were determined and the results were compared with various neutron radi- ation protection materials such as Al 6061 alloy and polyethylene. The nuclear interactions and effective dose measurements of the shielding materials were studied using the Monte Carlo N-Particle transport code (MCNP). The polymer matrix had a better shielding performance for fast neutrons (Adeli et al., 2017). Researchers are developing new composite materials for gamma ray shielding and fireproofing. New composite materials were prepared using vanadium slag, epoxy resin, and anti- mony trioxide. Different composite compound ratios were investigated to find the best mixing ratio for radiation shielding and fireproofing. The gamma radiation shielding properties of the samples were determined by BXCOM and MCNP 6.2. The BXCOM program assessed the properties in the 0.015–15 MeV energy range. The shielding properties of the
composite materials demonstrate that they can be used as an alternative to concrete (Kavanoz et al., 2019). The neutron shielding capacity of epoxy-based composite materials can be increased by adding various metals. New types of composite materials were produced with additive materials  such  as  Fe  (iron),  Bi  (bismuth),  Ta  (tantalum),  and  WC
(tungsten carbide). The radiation shielding parameters were determined for 4.5 MeV 241Am–Be neutrons and 1.25 MeV 60Co energetic gamma rays using the Geant4 and FLUKA simulation codes. The tantalum-epoxy
sample (Canel et al., 2019) had the best shielding performance. Boron and boron containing minerals were also used in neutron shielding studies. Borated polyethylene composites were developed with boron carbide (B4C) added to polyethylene. The neutron shielding capacity and efficiency were tested by neutron absorption and Monte Carlo simulations. A composite with 10% boron had better density, morphology, mechanical attributes, and thermal stability than a neat polyethylene matrix (Uddin et al., 2020).
In this study, new composite samples with different chemical amounts of chromium oxide (Cr2O3), lithium fluoride (LiF), and nickel oxide (NiO) were produced. The effects of high temperature and corrosion and the fast neutron and gamma ray shielding properties were evaluated. The experimental and theoretical neutron and gamma shielding abilities were compared with normal concrete and paraffin.
2.Theoretical background
The interactions of neutrons with a material depend on the energy of the incoming neutrons and the characteristics of the target material. When fast neutrons interact with target material, the attenuation ca- pacity of the material against fast neutrons is measured using the fast neutron total macroscopic and effective removal cross-sections. The total microscopic cross-section (σt) of neutrons with a certain energy expresses the probability of the interaction with the target nucleus. This quantity includes the scattering (elastic and inelastic) (σs) and absorp- tion (radioactive, radioactive capture, fission, reaction) cross-section (σa) as follows:@1
The total macroscopic cross-section of the mixture or compounds can be calculated as follows:
@2
where Ni and σt i are the number of nuclei per unit volume and the total microscopic cross-section of the ith constituent material, respectively (Tsoulfanidis, 1984).
Fast neutron shielding characteristics can be determined using both the effective removal cross-section and total macroscopic cross-section, but the effective removal cross-section differs from the total macro- scopic     cross-section.     The     effective     removal     cross   section,
R  cm—1  (cm—1),  refers  to  the  probability that  neutrons with  fast  or
fission level energy will enter the first collision as they pass through the target material (US Department of Energy, 1993).
If the effective removal cross-section ( R) of materials divided by sample density (ρ ; gcm—3) the mass removal cross-sections
R /ρ cm2g—1 are obtained.
The effective removal cross-sections of mixtures, alloys and com- pounds are calculated as follows (El-Khayatt and Akkurt, 2013):
@3
@4
whereωi and ρi are the weight fraction and partial density of the i th constituent element, respectively.
The half value layer (HVL) of composite formulations is calculated using the following (Zali et al., 2018).
@5
Table 1
Chemical composition ratios and densities of the new composite samples (%).
Beer-Lambert’s law describes the relationship between the in- tensities of un-attenuated (I0) and attenuated (I) photons of any materialwith a thickness of x as follows:
@6
whereμis the linear attenuation coefficient (LAC) of the investigated material. The LAC value divided by the sample density ρ obtains the mass attenuation coefficient (MAC) of the material. The thickness required to halve the number of photons entering the material is defined as the half value layer (HVL) and is calculated using equation (7) (Sayyed, 2017):@7
The effective atomic number is a virtual atomic number that de- termines the behavior of any complex material depending on the energy of the incoming radiation and is expressed as follows:
@8
where fi, Aiare Zi the mole fraction, atomic mass, and atomic number of the ith consistent elements, respectively.
3.Materials and methods
3.1.Geant4 and FLUKA codes
The Geant4 code is a simulation tool developed by a group of sci- entists at the European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN). The code was first used to predict photon interactions that can occur in large hadron collisions (LHC) and particle detectors (ATLAS). It is currently used to simulate particle physics, nuclear physics, medical physics, ra- diation shielding, radiation biology, space research, and nuclear ex- periments (Wellisch, 2005). The code consists of a large toolkit that determines the detector geometry and materials, secondary radiation generation, monitoring of radiation passage through materials, and detector response. It includes physical models that simulate radiation interactions with matter in an energy range from 250 eV to TeV (Agostinelli et al., 2003). The interactions between neutron particles and shielding material were determined using a simulation simulated design
in this study. FLUKA is one of the basic radiation transport codes. FLUKA (Battistoni et al., 2015), (Bo¨hlen et al., 2014), (Vlachoudis, 2009) cal- culates particle transport and interactions with matter. Target design, calorimetry, activation, dosimetry, detectors, accelerator systems, cos- mic rays, neutrino physics, and radiation therapy are FLUKA’s main applications.
3.2.Sample preparation and experimental procedure
The neutron shielding ability of chromium oxide (Cr2O3), lithium fluoride (LiF), and nickel oxide (NiO) materials were determined using Geant4. They have an excellent shielding capacity for neutron radiation. The simulations were conducted for molded epoxy resin (100) and epoxy + metal oxide with percentages varying from 5% to 40%. The material was prepared using epoxy resin (C2H25ClO5) as the hardener (C9H10O3) and commercially available chromium oxide, lithium fluo-
ride, and nickel oxide powder. The additive, hardener, and epoxy resinwere mixed at a constant speed for 10 min at 500 rpm until homoge- neous. The resulting mixture was poured into cylindrical silicone rubber molds and allowed to dry at room temperature. The chemical compo-sitions and densities of the produced samples are listed in Table 1, and their images are shown in Fig. 1. The best way to increase the high temperature resistance of a composite material; either adding a material
Table 1
Chemical composition ratios and densities of the new composite samples (%).Fig.  1.  Produced samples.
known as ATH (Alumina Trihydrate), known as MDH (Magnesium Hy- droxide) or coating it with a material such as sodium silicate (Ryu et al., 2017). In order to increase the temperature resistance of composite materials against high temperatures, all produced samples are coated with Soudal Calofer sodium silicate sealant, a sodium silicate based high quality asbestos-free sealant used in high temperature environments (1500 ◦C). Using the described methodology, 12 different materials, each 2.5 cm thickness, were produced.
Neutron absorption equivalent dose measurement experiments were conducted using the 241Am–Be fast neutron source (its properties are shown in Table 2) and a Canberra NP series portable BF3 gas propor-
tional neutron detector. The detector had sensitivity in a range of 0–100
Table 2
Nuclear structure properties of the 241Am–Be neutron source Physical half-life:
432.2 years Specific activity: 127GBq/g.mSv/h (0–10 Rem/h), measuring capability in a 0.025 eV-15 MeV en- ergy range, and 5% detector linearity. The experimental design is shown in Fig. 2. Each sample was placed between the neutron source and the detector to measure the absorption dose. When no sample was in front of the source, the source dose was measured and the background dose (D0) was determined. The dose absorbed (DD) by the detector was determined between the detector and sample. Then the sample’s absorbed dose ratio was determined using D  D0   DD. In addition to the absorbed dose amount, the absorbed dose ratios for all samples were
also calculated using (D /D0)x100.
4.Results and discussion
4.1.Neutron shielding properties of the composites
The samples were divided into three series denoted by A, B, and C. When the LiF ratio in A increased, the NiO and Cr2O3 ratios decreased. When the NiO ratio in B increased, the LiF and Cr2O3 ratios decreased. When  the Cr2O3 ratio in C increased, the  LiF and  NiO ratios  decreased.
To determine the neutron shielding ability of shielding materials, the effective removal cross-section ΣR (cm—1), transmission number, mean
free path (MFP), and half value layer (HVL) must be known. These shielding parameters were calculated using the Monte Carlo simulation
Geant4 and FLUKA codes and equations (3)–(5). The results are pro- vided in Fig. 3 and Table 3. As shown in Fig. 3, the samples’ effectiveremoval cross-section values were compared with paraffin  and normal
concrete, which are widely used in shielding research. Our new com- posite samples had higher effective removal cross-section values thanparaffin and normal concrete. This mean that the new composite sam-ples have excellent shielding ability for fast neutrons (Singh and Bad- iger, 2014). All of the samples were bombarded with 100,000 neutronswith an average energy of 4.5 MeV and the numbers of neutrons pene-trating the samples were determined. As shown in Table 3, the numbers of penetrating neutrons in all of the new composite samples were lower than those of paraffin and normal concrete. This is proof that the incoming neutrons were well absorbed.The mean free path (λ) and half value layer (HVL) were similarly
compared. As shown in Table 3, these values in all of the new composites were significantly lower than those of paraffin and normal concrete. This indicates that all of the new composites were better able to stop fastneutrons than the reference samples. As shown in Table 3 and Fig. 3, theB series samples had better shielding properties than the A and C series.In the B series, the NiO ratio increased from 10% to 40% and the shielding capacity of the samples in this series increased accordingly.Fig. 2. Dose rate measurement system design.Fig. 3. Comparison of the fast  neutron  effective  removal  Cross-Sections  of the samples.
Table 3
Comparison of the new composites’ fast neutron shielding parameters in a 2.5 cm  thick sample.
However, the increase in the LiF ratio in the A series and the increase of Cr2O3 in the B series clearly shows that it reduces the neutron absorption abilities. NiO increased the epoxy resin’s shielding capacity better than LiF and Cr2O3, which is very important for radiation shielding. The samples’ neutron flux values were also calculated using the FLUKA code. Neutron flux is a measurement of the neutron radiation intensity cor- responding to the velocities of the neutrons acting on a material. The higher the value, the higher the neutron density with reduced velocities. In other words, the material has good shielding properties. As shown in Fig. 4, all of the samples had higher neutron flux values than paraffin and normal concrete, indicating that the new composite materials had excellent neutron stopping properties.
Fig. 4. Comparison of the neutron energy fast Neutron flux (neutrons cm-2s-1) of the samples.
4.2.Fast neutron absorption tests
A material’s neutron shielding capability relies on dose absorption of high-energy neutrons. Absorption experiments were conducted using the experimental design shown in Fig. 2. The experimental and theo- retical absorption values and percent ratios provided in Table 4. The background dose (1.3027 μSv/h) was determined by measuring the dose from the source. According to Table 4, the samples had excellent shielding capacity, absorbing from 37% to 59% of the source dose. Thus, all of the composite samples had higher absorption power than paraffin and normal concrete. The effects on the absorbed dose of the added LiF, NiO, and Cr2O3 in the epoxy are shown in Figs. 5–7. As demonstrated in Fig. 5, the ratios of Cr2O3 and NiO in the A series decreased when the LiF ratio increased. However, the absorbed dose rate decreased as the LiF ratio increased. In other words, increasing the LiF ratio adversely affected the shielding in this composite. Similarly, as shown in Fig. 6, the LiF and Cr2O3 ratios decreased and the NiO ratio increased in the B series. The absorption power of the composite increased accordingly. Thus, increasing the amount of NiO had a positive effect on the shielding
capacity. As demonstrated in Fig. 7, the LiF and NiO content in the C series decreased when the Cr2O3 ratio increased. Despite this increase,the absorption ability of the C series composites decreased. Accordingly,
Table 4
Experimental absorbed dose rates of the samples.
Fig. 5. The effect of the LiF ratio on the absorbed dose in the A series samples.
increasing the Cr2O3 ratio also had a negative effect on the shielding
capacity. NiO increased the shielding capacity of the composites better than the others. Among the A, B, and C series, the samples in the B series had the best absorption power for fast neutrons.
4.3.Gamma radiation shielding properties
The gamma ray shielding parameters of the new materials were calculated using Phy-X/PSD (S¸ akar et al., 2020) software in the energy range of 0.015–15 MeV. The energy-dependent results of the MAC values of the 12 different epoxy-based materials and pure epoxy are shown in Table 5. To compare the MAC values, the relative difference changes of all of the materials with reference to pure epoxy are shown in Fig. 8. The graph demonstrates that some of the produced materials had higher, MAC values of up to 250% at a photon energy of 0.015, but these values rapidly decreased as a function of the increasing energy. In the
low-energy region (E < 0.2 MeV), the photoelectric effect is dominant,
which is proportional to the fourth to the fifth degree of the atomic number. Thus, adding high atomic number elements or high molecular
Fig. 6. The effect of the NiO ratio on the absorbed dose in the B series samples.
Fig. 7. The effect of  the  Cr2O3  ratio  on  the  absorbed  dose  in  the  C  se-  ries samples.
weight compounds to materials will increase the MAC values in the low-energy region. The high differences shown in Fig. 8 are due to the high molecular weight Cr2O3 and NiO compounds doped into the epoxy. Epoxy resin has a molecular weight of approximately 30 g/mol, so the MAC values will decrease if a compound with a molecular weight lower than resin’s molecular weight is added. This was demonstrated in the LiF doped materials (SA1-4). There was a significant decrease in the MAC values due to the increased LiF concentration. Specifically, since the SA4 sample contained 40% LiF, it had lower MAC values than pure epoxy. Table 5 and Fig. 8 demonstrate the effect of the addition of different molecular weight materials on the MAC values. As the photon energy increased, Compton scattering predominated first, and at energies higher than 1.02 MeV, pair formation began to dominate. The photo- electric effect lost its effectiveness in these regions. In the Compton scattering region, most of the photons entering the material were scat- tered and their absorption probabilities decreased to minimum levels. Furthermore, the MAC values in this region were almost independent of the chemical composition of the materials. Fig. 8 shows that the relative differences between the MAC values of pure epoxy and those of the other materials were negligible or very close to zero in an energy range of 0.2–4 MeV. Although the threshold energy value for pair formation was
1.02 MeV, the dominant energy varied according to the type of material.
In these materials, pair formation started to dominate at 4 MeV photon energy and higher, and the relative differences between the MAC values increased. The inset of Fig. 8 shows the MAC changes in a 4–15 MeV energy range. Since the pair production cross-section had an approxi- mate correlation with the square of the atomic number, the addition of NiO and Cr2O3 compounds increased the MAC values relative to pure epoxy, while the LiF compound caused a decrease.
One of the most important parameters for radiation shielding is that the materials used should be less thick. This not only reduces the amount of material used, but also requires less volume. Therefore, it is important to know the HVL values of new alternative materials used in shielding applications. Fig. 9 shows the variations in the HVL values over a wide energy range. Since most photons in the low-energy range are well absorbed by epoxy-based materials, their HVL values are close to zero. However, due to the maximum scattering cross-section value in the Compton region (the middle energy region), the likelihood of absorption decreases and thicker materials are necessary. High-energy photons also have lower wavelengths and therefore can travel longer distances in materials. Thus, the HVL values of the new materials increased as a function of the increased photon energy. The graph shows that while the pure epoxy and SA1-3 samples had the highest HVL values in the entire energy range, the SB4 sample had the lowest HVL values. Considering the MAC values, there was no direct correlation between the HVL and MAC values. HVL values directly depend on the linear attenuation co- efficient, that is, they are independent of the density of materials. However, MAC values directly depend on the density of materials. Furthermore, the densities of materials do not directly correlate with the atomic number or molecular weight of the components they contain. Therefore, the HVL value alone does not indicate that a material is a good shielding material. However, the HVL parameter is important because it indicates the thickness necessary to reduce a certain amount of radiation. In this study, although there was no linear relationship between the MAC and HVL values, the LAC values of the materials with generally higher, MAC values were high and therefore the HVL values were low. For example, the increasing order of the HVL values of the
materials produced at 15 MeV was (in cm): NB4 (10.3) >NB3 (11.3)
>NC4 (12.2) >NB2 (12.4) >NC3 (12.6) >NA1 (12.7) >NC2 (13) >NC1
(13.3) >NB1 (13.8) >NA2 (14.7) >NA3 (17) >P (20.5) >NA4 (21.2).
Although this sequence generally complied with the MAC values, it did not exactly match the magnitude order of the MAC values at 15 MeV photon energy.
Similar to the MAC value, the effective atomic number is used to obtain information about the absorption capacity of materials. Complex materials with highly effective numbers are considered good shielding candidates. Fig. 10 shows the variations in the pure epoxy and  NiO, Cr2O3, and LiF doped epoxy samples throughout the entire energy range (left side) and at 150 keV-15 MeV (right side). The Zeff values were highest when the absorption cross-sections of the materials were high in the low photon energy region. The graph shows that increasing the LiF doping decreased the gamma ray absorption capacity of the epoxy ma- terial. Among the LiF doped materials, SA1 (LiF 10%) had the highest  Zeff value while SA4 (LiF 40%) had the lowest value. The graph also shows that SB3 (NiO 30% + Cr2O3 5%), SB4 (NiO 30%), SC3 (NiO 5% +
Cr2O3 30%), and SC4 (Cr2O3 40%) had the highest Zeff values. However, the Zeff values of these materials were very close since the molecular weights of the doped NiO and Cr2O3 compounds were very close. The extended graph of the Zeff on the right side shows the regions where Compton scattering and pair production dominated. The Zeff values were lowest in the Compton region, but tended to increase relative to the Compton region in the pair production region. In the region between 150 keV and 15 MeV, the Zeff values of all of the materials ranged from approximately 4.0 to 5.6. In this energy region, the SC3 and SC4 samples had the highest Zeff values.
Table 5
Mass attenuation coefficients of the samples.Fig. 8. Relative differences of the MAC values with respect to pure epoxy resin.
5.Conclusion
In this study, 12 different epoxy-based composite materials were produced by adding chromium oxide (Cr2O3), lithium fluoride (LiF), and nickel oxide (NiO). The temperature resistance of epoxy materials with metal oxide additive, whose structure is deteriorating at 50 ◦C under normal conditions, has been increased to approximately 350 ◦C by coating with Soudal Calofer (a high-quality sealant based on sodium silicate). In order to determined fast neutron shielding capacity of the
Fig. 9. Variations of the half value layers of the investigated samples as a function of the incident photon energy.
samples, experimental measurements and theoretical (GEANT4 and FLUKA codes) calculations were made. Main neutron shielding param- eters shielding: the total macroscopic cross-sections, effective removal cross-sections, mean free path, half value layer, and transmission neutron number were calculated. The experimental and theoretical re- sults showed that the doping metal oxides to the epoxy-based materials have significant effect on their neutron and gamma radiation shielding capacities. In terms of neutron radiation shielding capacity, the SB4 coded sample (Epoxy resin 60% - NiO 40%) exhibited best shielding properties among the other samples. In addition to neutron shielding parameters, the gamma radiation shielding parameters (MAC, HVL and Zeff) in the energy range of 0.015–15 MeV were also calculated by using Phy-X-PSD software. To be able to make detail comparison of the photon attenuation parameters the relative differences variations with respect to pure epoxy are presented. While the MAC values of the investigated samples increased with the doping of Cr2O3 and NiO, it was concluded that it decreased significantly with the doping of LiF. SB4 and SC4 samples were found to have up to 250% higher, MAC values in the low
Fig. 10. Effective atomic numbers of the pure and LiF, NiO, and Cr2O3 doped epoxy materials.
photon energy range than pure epoxy. When Zeff and MAC values were evaluated together, it was determined that these two samples had the best gamma shielding ability. In this study, it was concluded that the SB4 coded material showed the best shielding property compared to other examined materials in terms of neutron and gamma radiations. More- over, the results have been obtained that doped epoxy-based materials with relatively high heat resistance, economical and non-toxic, can be an alternative shielding material in areas where neutrons and gamma rays are actively used.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the Project of Agri Ibrahim Cecen University Scientific Research Projects (MYO 18.001–19.001).