<title>Dose conversion coefficients for Chinese reference adult male and female voxel phantoms from idealized neutron exposures</title>
<author>Huan Liu, Junli Li, Rui Qiu, Zhen Wu, Yuxi Pan & Chunyan Li</author>
<Affiliation>aDepartment of Engineering Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; bKey Laboratory of Particle & Radiation Imaging (Ministry of Education), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; cNuctech Company Limited, Beijing, China</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1323685</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2017.1323685</URL>
ABSTRACT
A whole-body voxel phantom called CRAF representing the Chinese adult female was constructed in this study from color photographs. The CRAF has a height of 160 cm and a weight of 54 kg with 80 organs and tissues, including almost all organs required in the ICRP Publication 103. Masses of all organs in CRAF are consistent with the Chinese reference data within 1%. Our research group has previously developed a Chinese reference adult male phantom called CRAM, which has a height of 170 cm and a weight of 60 kg with 80 tissues and organs. A new set of fluence- to-dose conversion coefficients based on the Chinese reference adult voxel phantoms CRAM and CRAF are presented for six idealized external neutron exposures from 10−8 MeV to 20 MeV. The calculation of organ-absorbed doses and effective doses were performed with the Monte Carlo transport code MCNPX 2.4. The resulting dose conversion coefficients were compared with those published in ICRP Publication 116, which represents the reference Caucasian. It was observed that the two sets of organ-absorbed dose conversion coefficients agreed well for most organs in ROT and ISO geometry; however, considerable deviations were found in some organs in AP, PA, RLAT and LLAT exposures. Organ-absorbed dose coefficients difference showed good agreement with the difference of organ depth distribution between Chinese and ICRP phantoms. For neutrons with energies above 2 MeV, the effective dose conversion coefficients of Chinese reference adult are almost identical to those of ICRP Publication 116 in AP, PA, ROT and ISO geometries, while are generally 15% higher than those of ICRP Publication 116 from lateral geometries. When energies range from 10−8  MeV to 1 MeV, differences are within 10% in AP (–5%), PA (–8%) and ROT (4%)
geometries; however, relatively large discrepancies are shown in lateral and ISO geometries, with
differences of 15% for LLAT, 20% for RLAT and 12% for ISO, respectively.
KEYWORDS
Dose conversion coeﬃcients; voxel phantom; neutron exposures; Monte Carlo
1.Introduction
The radiation protection quantities, such as equivalent dose and effective dose, which provide a quantitative description of biological effect due to radiation expo- sures, play an important role in radiation protection. The equivalent dose is defined as the mean absorbed dose of the organ or tissue multiplied by the corre- sponding radiation weighting factor, and the effective dose can be obtained by summation of the modified equivalent dose in various organs and tissues of the human body by tissue weighting factors [1]. However, these protection quantities are unreachable through the method in the definition since organ-absorbed dose cannot be measured directly. Therefore, International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) Publi- cation 74 introduces dose conversion coefficients relat- ing protection quantities to the ‘operational quantities’ [2], e.g. fluence and air kerma, which can be measured directly at workplace. As a result, in the last few decades, many computational models of the human body, start- ing from simple mathematical models to voxel mod- els and even to boundary based models, have been
established for calculating the various dose conversion coefficients in radiation protection.
Mathematical phantoms, which have been widely used for decades to determine radiation dose from both internal and external radiation exposures, use various mathematical equations (cones, spheres, planes, etc.) to represent the various tissues, lung and skeletal regions of the body [3,4]. The reference dose conversion coef- ficients provided by ICRP Publication 74 [2] were cal- culated based on the Medical Internal Radiation Dose (MIRD) phantom included in MIRD pamphlet No.5 by the MIRD Committee. With the rapid develop- ment of medical imaging technology and computers, high-resolution digital images of internal anatomy have become available. The first voxel model, whose data were from the computed tomography (CT) scans of a female cadaver, was reported by Gibbs et al. in 1984 [5]. Since then, researchers have made considerable efforts to construct voxel models based on CT, mag- netic resonance imaging (MRI) or color photographs. To date, more than 30 voxel-based models have been established. Since voxel phantoms are anatomically more realistic than the MIRD phantoms, two voxel
phantoms were decided to be the ICRP reference adult voxel phantoms in ICPR Publication 110 [6]. In ICRP Publication 116 [7], the new reference external dose conversion coefficients, which were calculated from ICRP reference adult voxel phantoms, were introduced to replace the previous values of ICRP Publication 74.
However, ICRP voxel phantoms were constructed based on Caucasian, which were different from Asian in height, weight and anatomy. In 2001, a Japanese adult male voxel phantom was constructed by Saito et al. [8]. Two reference adult male and female Korean phan- toms HDRK-man and HDRK-woman were developed by Kim et al. [9,10]. In China, B.Q. Zhang et al. (2005) reported the first Chinese voxel model CNMAN, which was constructed from the Chinese Visible Human Project data set [11]. G. Zhang et al. (2007) reported another visible Chinese human phantom (VCH) [12]. In 2009, a high-resolution voxel model of Chinese ref- erence adult male based on a previous individual voxel model, denoted as CAM or CRAM, was constructed by Liu et al. [13,14]. In 2013, the Chinese reference adult female phantom was developed by Sheng et al. [15].  In order to calculate organ-absorbed dose and effec- tive dose for external exposures to represent the Chi- nese adult workers, we need a set of the Chinese adult reference phantoms, including male and female. How- ever, we currently only have Chinese reference adult male voxel phantom (CRAM), and there has no avail- able Chinese reference adult female voxel phantom in our research group.
Based on anatomically realistic phantoms, broad information on operational aspects of diagnostic radi- ology, radionuclide therapy, nuclear medicine as well as radiation protection has been obtained. However, more attention is focused on simulations of photon transport due to its wide availability in current medi- cal physics. Since the particle transport, nuclear interac- tions energy spectra and energy-loss mechanisms vary a lot between different types of irradiation source, it is necessary to investigate the computational dose under various circumstances. Neutrons are another important but more complex source type. Neutron radiation expo- sures are associated with diverse human activities, such as nuclear power generation, high-energy particle accel- eration and deep space explorations, where the energy spectra can range from the thermal region to above GeV levels, and always involve a variety of secondary particles. Neutron external dose conversion coefficients based on ICRP reference adult voxel phantoms have been included in ICRP Publication 116 [7]. However, these data cannot represent Chinese well due to the dif- ferences between Caucasian and Chinese in anatomy. Therefore, neutron external dose conversion coeffi- cients based on Chinese reference adult voxel phantoms are needed.
In the present work, a Chinese adult female voxel phantom CNWM was firstly developed based on the
color photographs of a Chinese female cadaver, and the Chinese reference female voxel phantom CRAF was then constructed based on CNWM, using the same method as CRAM [11,14]. Then, a new set of neu- tron dose conversion coefficients are calculated based on CRAM and CRAF with energy ranging from 10−8 MeV to 20 MeV, under six idealized external neutron exposures: anterior-posterior (AP), posterior anterior (PA), left lateral (LLAT), right lateral (RLAT), rotational (ROT), and isotropic (ISO) geometries. The Monte Carlo code MCNPX 2.4 was used in the calculation   of organ-absorbed dose. The dose conversion coeffi- cients from CRAM and CRAF were compared with those from ICRP Publication 116, where the phantoms were developed to represent Caucasians.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.The construction of Chinese adult female phantom CNWM
The original data were a set of high-resolution color photographs, which was obtained from a 22 year-old Chinese female cadaver. This woman was 162 cm in height and 54 kg in weight, which was very close to that of Chinese reference adult female. The dataset had a total of 3640 cross-sectional slices, which spaced at 0.5 mm for head and neck region and 1.0 mm for other regions. Each slice had a resolution of 3072 × 2048 pixels. A total of 459 slices (2 mm slice thickness in head and neck region and 4mm slice thickness in other regions) were selected for the construction of CNWM. Zhang et al. have developed Chinese adult  male CNMAN in 2007, and CNWM was constructed using the similar method as described by Zhang et al. [11]. Since tissues and organs can be identified visually in each slice, Adobe Photoshop 7.0 was used to segment by enhancing their borders. The segmented tissues and organs included colon, stomach, breast, adrenals, gall bladder, heart, kidneys, muscle, pancreas, small intes- tine, spleen, thymus, uterus, ovary, bladder, esophagus, liver, bones, thyroid, brain, eye lens, salivary glands, fat, and skin. The voxel size is 0.595 mm × 0.595 mm × 2 mm in head and neck region and 0.595 mm × 0.595 mm × 4 mm in other regions. And the voxel dimension is 858 × 571 × 108 in head and neck region and 858 × 571 × 351 in other regions. CNWM is 162 cm in height
and 50.8 in weight.
2.2.The Construction of Chinese reference adult female phantom CRAF based on CNWM
Liu et al. described in detail the process of constructing CRAM from the original model CNMAN in 2009 [13]. In the present work, CRAF was developed based on the original model CNWM, using the similar method as described by Liu et al. in 2009.
Initially, the voxel size in sagittal axis was adjusted to 1.96 mm, 3.98 mm in head region and other regions, respectively, making the height of CNWM being 160 cm which is the reference height of Chinese adult female [16]. Subsequently, the in-plane voxel size was prop- erly scaled in the original phantoms according to the skeleton reference volume of Asians [17]. The require- ment led to voxel dimensions  in-plane  of  0.613 0.613 mm2 for CNWM. The skeleton of CNWM was then, respectively, sub-segmented into 19 specific sites, each of which was subdivided into cortical bone and spongiosa, the latter one considered as a homogeneous mixture of the red bone marrow (RBM), yellow bone marrow, bone trabecula, unseparated cartilage and mis- cellaneous tissue. The mass of various skeleton tissues at each bone site was calculated according to Asian refer- ence skeleton mass [17] and the distribution data from ICRP Publication 70 [18]. A more detailed descrip- tion about bone segmentation method can be found in reference [14].
Some important organs, including extra-thoracic organs, eyes, oral mucosa, teeth, blood vessels and some organ walls were not segmented in CNWM. These organs were then sub-segmented. Several organs, such as eyes, blood vessels, were segmented directly from the original color photographs. Organs like oral mucosa, which was hard to be segmented directly, was divided as a thin layer of oral cavity in the surface with the method of erosion, which will be described in the following paragraph. Similarly, the segmentation of the wall from the content for organs, such as stomach, large intestine, small intestine, gall bladder and urinary bladder, was also conducted using the erosion method, where the wall was segmented as the outer layer of the content with a suitable thickness.
For the purpose of developing voxel models to represent the Chinese reference female, the adjust- ment of organ mass was carried out by changing the organ volume, which could be derived from the ref- erence mass [19] divided by its corresponding density
taken from ICRU Report 46 [20]. With MATLAB programming, the adjustments were performed by the so-called erosion and grow methods. For organs whose volume is larger than the respective reference value, the grow method was used to search and change the voxel boundary of the organ to adipose tissue until the reference volume was achieved. On the contrary, an opposite procedure known as erosion method, where the adjacent adipose tissue voxels were changed to organ tissue until the reference value was matched, was used for organs with a volume smaller than the respec- tive reference value. After the modulation, the organ masses in CNWM agree with the Chinese reference data. However, the whole-body mass was still a little larger than the 54 kg reference weight of a Chinese  female. Therefore, whole-body weight adjustment was implied by reducing the adipose tissue.  Eventually,  the weight and height of CRAF (54kg, 160 cm) was consistent with the Chinese reference value after the whole adjustment mentioned above.
2.3.Monte Carlo simulation for CRAM and CRAF voxel phantoms
MCNPX 2.4 was used in the calculation with CRAM and CRAF voxel phantoms to determine the organ- absorbed dose from external mono-energetic neutron irradiation. As the neutron cross-section is crucial to the calculation, the cross-section library used in this work is shown in Table 1. The S(α,β) scattering was considered for neutrons below 4 eV, and the corre- sponding cross-section data adopted were from those for light water at 300 K in the TMCCS library (data card: MTm: 1wtr.01t). CRAM and CRAF voxel phan- toms were implemented into MCNPX by using repeated geometry structure, i.e. Universe, Lattice and Filled cards. With MATLAB programming, the voxel phan- tom data were converted to MCNP syntax. The tissue densities and elemental compositions used in CRAM and CRAF were obtained from ICRU Report 46 [20].
Table . The cross-section library of neutrons used for calculation in this work.
In configuration of the irradiation source, parallel neutron beams directed perpendicularly to the longi- tudinal axis of the body were set for AP, PA,  LLAT and RLAT geometries, respectively. A full 360° rota- tion of neutron beams around the longitudinal axis of the fixed body was set for ROT geometry. For this ROT geometry, a cylindrical surface, which is big enough to incorporate the whole phantom, was firstly defined in MCNPX. Particle positions are sampled randomly on the cylindrical surface. Particle directions are sampled isotropically on the plane perpendicularly to the verti- cal axis of phantom. Neutron beams projected with no preference in direction, where the particle flux per unit solid angle remained constant, were configured for ISO geometry. For this ISO geometry, a very big spherical surface, whose radius is about 5 times of the length of phantom vertical axis, was firstly defined to incorporate the whole phantom in MCNPX. Particle positions are sampled randomly on the spherical surface, and the par- ticle directions are isotropic. Incident source energies ranging from 10−8 MeV to 20 MeV were investigated.For neutron energy below 20 MeV, the absorbed dose for tissues and organs consist of two parts, the dose con- tributed by heavy charged particles and recoil nucleons which were originally generated by the neutron, and thedose produced by the secondary photons. To record the energy deposition of neutrons and photons, the original F6 tally from MCNPX was used in this work.
2.4.Dose conversion coefficients calculation
Original quantities, which were directly obtained from MCNPX, were absorbed doses of tissues and organs. These quantities were then normalized by incident neutron fluence to be expressed as the fluence-to- dose conversion coefficients. However, the absorbed dose to RBM cannot be calculated directly due to its small dimensions. The three-correction-factors (3CFs) method was used to derive the RBM dose [14]. In this method, Equations (1) and (2) were used for calculating site-specific RBM dose contributed by neutron and sec- ondary photon, respectively. The site-specific absorbed dose to RBM was obtained by adding neutron dose and secondary photon dose to RBM. Absorbed dose to the whole RBM was calculated as a sum of the absorbed dose to RBM in site-specific bones weighted by the cor- responding RBM mass fraction
@1
@2
where(μen/ρ)RBMand(μen/ρ)SPA are mass-energy absorption coefficients for RBM and spoginosa, respec- tively, ϕn,SPA(E) and ϕp,SPA(E)are neutron and photon fluence in the corresponding spogiosa, respectively, KRBM and KSPA are the kerma coefficients for RBM and spogiosa, respectively, and KS(E) is the King–Spiers dose enhancement factor for considering the effect that extra electrons generated in trabecular bone enter into RBM. Kerma coefficients were obtained from ICRU Report 46 [20]. The bone-site-specific KS correction factors for 44-year adult were used in the calculation [21].
In the meanwhile, the dose to spongiosa was used as a surrogate for the bone surface dose. The neutron radiation weighting factor (ωR) recommended by ICRP Publication 103 was used to calculate the equivalent dose for each organ under incident levels of energy [1]. The ωR used in this study are expressed in Equation (1):@3
where En is the source energy, in unit of MeV. The  whole-body effective dose, acquired by multiplying the
Figure . D view for bones and organs in CRAM (left) and CRAF
(right).
Table . Organ mass in CRAF and the corresponding Chinese reference values.
equivalent dose by the specialized tissue weighting fac- tor (ωT) defined in ICRP Publication 103, can be calcu- lated as in Equation (2):@4
where HMT and HFT represent the organ equivalent
dose for male and female, respectively.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.CRAM and CRAF voxel phantom
The CRAF voxel phantom is 160 cm in height and 54 kg in weight with 80 organs and tissues, including almost all organs required in the ICRP Publication 103. The size of each voxel is 0.613 mm × 0.613 mm × 1.98 mm in head and neck region and 0.613 mm × 0.613 mm ×3.96 mm in other regions. And the voxel dimension is 858 × 571 × 108 in head and neck region and 858 × 571 × 351 in other regions. The CRAF voxel phan- tom is shown graphically in Figure 1 (right). Table 2 summarizes the masse of individual tissues and organs
in CRAF. For comparison purpose, Chinese reference data are also given in the table. Organ mass difference between CRAF and Chinese reference data are pre- sented in the last columns. Table 3 gives the site-specific bone mass (g) in the CRAF voxel model. Table 4 gives the densities and compositions for cortical bone and spongiosa of each bone site.
Our research group has previously developed a Chinese reference adult male phantom called CRAM [11,13,14], which has a height of 170 cm and a weight of 60 kg with more than 80 tissues and organs. The  size of each voxel is 1.741 mm × 1.741 mm × 1 mm, 1.741  mm  × 1.741  mm  × 3  mm,  1.741  mm  ×
1.741 mm × 5 mm in the head, the torso and the legs,
Table . Site-speciﬁc bone mass (g) in CRAF.respectively. And the voxel dimension is 120 × 120 ×
230, 130 × 280 × 247, 110 × 230 × 158 for the head,
the torso and the legs, respectively. The CRAM voxel phantom is shown graphically in Figure 1 (left). ICRP reference adult male and female voxel phantom has a height of 176 cm and 163 cm, respectively, and have a weight of 73 kg and 60 kg, respectively.
3.2.
Dose conversion coefficients for idealized external neutron exposures
Once the neutron fluence 8, the organ-absorbed dose DT, and the whole-body effective dose ET were obtained in different radiation geometries and different neutron energies, the organ-absorbed dose and the whole-body
Table . Element compositions and densities for each bone site.
VFigure . Comparison of organ-absorbed dose per ﬂuence for the stomach of the CRAM (a), liver of CRAM (b), lung of CRAF (c) and RBM of CRAF (d) in six ideal radiation geometries.
effective dose conversion coefficients were calculated by DT /8 and ET /8, respectively. Finally, a total of 3588 organ-absorbed dose conversion coefficients were calculated for CRAM, corresponding to 26 organs, 6 different radiation geometries and 23 energy groups ranging from 1 × 10−8 MeV to 20 MeV. Meanwhile, 4278 organ-absorbed dose conversion coefficients were
calculated for CRAF, corresponding to 31 organs, 6 different radiation geometries and 23 energy groups ranging from 1 × 10−8 MeV to 20 MeV. In addition, 138 effective dose conversion coefficients were obtained for the Chinese reference adult. The statistical uncer- tainties of the result in the simulation for CRAM and CRAF were less than 5%, and only 5% of all dose data
Figure . Comparison of organ-absorbed dose conversion coeﬃcients from Chinese reference adult phantoms with values obtained from the ICRP  for the stomach in RLAT (a) and LLAT (b), bladder in PA (c) and AP (d).
Figure . Depth distribution of stomach from the right (a) and left (b), and depth distribution of urinary bladder from the front (c) and back (d).
are reported with uncertainties greater than 1%. Overall the precision is satisfactory.
3.3.Comparison of conversion coefficients among different irradiation conditions and different models
Figure 2 shows the dose conversion coefficients curve of some organs in CRAM and CRAF. The shape of the curves showing the fluence-to-absorbed dose conver- sion coefficients depending on neutron energy are more or less similar for all organs and geometries, which is in accordance with the varying predominance of types of particle interactions. Within the thermal regime, most of the direct energy deposition is contributed by gamma rays through the neutron-capture reaction. When the neutron energy increases from 10−8 MeV to 10−6 MeV, a slight increase can be observed for the dose conver- sion coefficient. At energy ranging from 1 eV to 10 keV, inelastic scattering and resonant capture reactions take place, which lead to a flat region being displayed. With the energy exceeding1 MeV, sharp increases are exhib- ited due to large energy transfers during elastic scatter- ing.
Absorbed dose conversion coefficients for the stom- ach in CRAM, for the liver in CRAM, for the lungs in CRAF, and for RBM in CRAF in six idealized irradi- ation geometries are shown in Figure 2(a), 2(b), 2(c), and 2(d), respectively. Since the stomach and liver are asymmetrical organs located superficially in the left and
right region of the body trunk, respectively, dose coef- ficients for these two organs irradiated from the reverse lateral direction, i.e. RLAT for stomach and LLAT for the liver, are the least among the six irradiation geome- tries, and dose coefficients of AP irradiation geometry of stomach and liver are the maximum. Correspond- ingly, for organs like lungs and RBM, which are located symmetrically in both sides of the human body, the dose conversion coefficients are almost the same in LLAT and RLAT geometries.
Dose coefficients for Chinese reference voxel phantoms (CRAM and CRAF) are compared with those for ICRP reference adult voxel phantoms. Obvious differences are found in some organs  for  AP, PA, RLAT and LLAT irradiation geometries. Organ dose coefficients difference showed good agree- ment with the difference of organ depth distribution between Chinese and ICRP phantoms. Figure 3(a) and 3(b) shows  the  dose  coefficients  for  stomach  in RLAT and LLAT irradiation geometries, respec- tively. Compared with the dose coefficients for ICRP reference adult male voxel phantom, dose coefficients of stomach for CRAM are about 80% and 25% higher in RLAT and LLAT, respectively, for energies less than 2 MeV, and about 40% and 12% higher in RLAT and LLAT, respectively, for energies between 2 and 20 MeV. In comparison with ICRP reference adult female voxel phantom, dose coefficients of stomach for CRAF are about 47% higher and 15% lower in RLAT and LLAT, respectively, for energies less than 2 MeV and about
Figure . Comparison of organ-absorbed dose conversion coeﬃcients among CRAM, CRAF, ICRP male and female phantom for lungs in ISO (a), esophagus in ROT (b), liver in ROT (c), stomach in ISO (d), thyroid in ISO (e), ovary in ISO (f ), adrenal in ISO (g), and thymus in ISO (h).
11% higher and 9% lower in RLAT and LLAT respec- tively for energies between 2 and 20 MeV. Figure 4(a) and 4(b) shows depth distribution for stomach from the right and left, respectively. Stomach locations for ICRP reference adult voxel phantoms are deeper than those for Chinese reference adult voxel phantoms in the right direction of body, which leads to larger shielding thickness in ICRP reference adult voxel phantoms in RLAT geometry. However, stomach location for CRAF is deeper than that for ICRP reference adult female
voxel phantom in the left direction of body, which leads to higher dose coefficients for ICRP reference adult female voxel phantom. Dose conversion coeffi- cients for bladder of different models in PA and AP irradiation geometries are shown in Figure 3(c) and 3(d), respectively. Figure 4(c) and 4(d) shows depth distribution for back and front, respectively. Compared with the ICRP reference adult voxel phantoms, Urinary bladder location in Chinese reference voxel phantoms is deeper in PA geometry but is much closer to the
Figure . The eﬀective dose conversion coeﬃcients of the Chinese Reference voxel phantoms under six idealized geometries (a), and ratios of the eﬀective dose conversion coeﬃcients from Chinese adult reference phantoms to those from ICRP  data under six idealized geometries (b).
surface in AP geometry. As a result, dose coefficients of urinary bladder for the Chinese reference voxel models are higher in PA geometry but lower in AP  geometry, when compared with those for ICRP refer- ence adult voxel phantoms.
Considering that the ISO and ROT geometries are to some extent combination of other four idealized geometries, smaller differences are generally observed for most organs in these two geometries between Chinese reference based voxel phantoms and the ICRP reference adult voxel phantoms. Figure 5(a)–(h) show the dose coefficients of different models for lungs in ISO, esophagus in ROT, liver in ROT, stomach in ISO, thyroid in ISO, ovary in ISO, adrenal in ISO and thy- mus in ISO, respectively. It can be obviously observed that dose coefficients for lungs, esophagus liver, stom- ach are basically the same in different models. However, there is a relatively large discrepancy for thyroid, ovary, adrenal and thymus in different models due to its small size.
The organ-absorbed dose conversion coefficients of Chinese adult reference phantoms CRAM and CRAF have been used to calculate the effective dose con- version coefficients. The radiation weighting factors of neutrons and the organ-specific tissue weighting fac- tors from ICRP Publication 103 were applied to cal- culated the effective doses according to Equation (2), introduced also by ICRP Publication 103. Figure 6(a) shows the effective dose conversion coefficients of the Chinese reference voxel phantoms under six idealized geometries. As is shown in the figure, the effective dose yielded by the AP geometry is the largest among the six irradiation conditions, since most organs which are crit- ical to the effective dose are located within the front por- tion of the body. However, the arms and increased body thickness along the coronal axis provide a longer dis- tance for particles to transport to the important organs, as a result of which, RLAT and LLAT report lower effec- tive doses. Considering the particles in ROT and ISO geometries are uniformly emitted, the effective doses from ROT and ISO are in the middle status.
Ratios of the effective dose conversion coefficients from ICRP 116 to those for Chinese adult reference phantoms under six idealized geometries are shown in Figure 6(b). For energies above 2 MeV, the effective dose coefficients of ICRP 116 is almost the same as those  of Chinese reference adult phantoms in AP, PA, ROT and ISO geometries, where the difference is within 5%. Compared with the Chinese reference adult phantoms, effective doses from lateral geometries of ICRP 116 is generally 10% lower for energies above 2 MeV, in which 15% at 4 MeV and 10% at 14 MeV in RLAT geometry. At energies below 1 MeV, the difference is quite mod- est in AP (5%), PA (8%) and ROT (–4%) geometries. However, a relatively large discrepancy is shown in lat- eral and ISO geometries at energies below 1 MeV, where the differences are –15% for LLAT, –20% for RLAT and
–12% for ISO, respectively. The higher height and heav- ier weight of Caucasians lead to larger lateral shield- ing thickness in Caucasian models, as a result, particles have to transport a longer distance to the radiosensitive organs in RLAT and LLAT geometries. Since transport distance is crucial to the organ-absorbed distance for low-energy particles, larger differences can be found in RLAT and LLAT geometries when energies are below 1 MeV. Considering that the ISO geometry is to some extent the combination of other four idealized geome- tries (AP, PA, LLAT and RLAT), the difference is bigger than AP and PA irradiation geometries but smaller than lateral irradiation geometries when energies are below 1 MeV.
4.Conclusion
In this study, a Chinese reference adult female phantom called CRAF, has been developed from the color photo- graphic images. The CRAF has a height of 160 cm and a weight of 54 kg with 80 organs and tissues. Masses of all organs in CRAF are consistent with the Chi- nese reference data within 1%. CRAF, together with Chinese reference adult male CRAM (170 cm in height,
60  kg  in  weight,  and  have  80  organs  and  tissues)
constructed by our research group previously, have been utilized to calculate the neutron organ-absorbed and effective dose conversion coefficients. The calcu- lation was performed using the Monte Carlo code MCNPX under six ideal radiation geometries with energy ranging from 10−8 MeV to 20 MeV. The organ dose conversion coefficients of CRAM and CRAF for six standard external exposures were compared with each other, where the deviation was determined by the location of the organs. Considerable differences were observed for several organs under some specific irradi- ation geometries. This new set of dose conversion coef- ficients which represent the reference Chinese adult was compared with the data recommended in ICRP Publi- cation 116 representing the reference Caucasian. It was observed that the two sets of organ-absorbed dose con- version coefficients agreed well for most organs in ROT and ISO geometries. However, considerable deviations were found in AP, PA, RLAT and LLAT exposures since organ locations and shapes varied a lot among different phantoms. Organ dose coefficients difference showed good agreement with the difference of organ depth dis- tribution between Chinese and ICRP phantoms. When neutron energies are above 2 MeV, the effective dose conversion coefficients of the Chinese reference adult phantoms are almost identical to those of ICRP 116 in AP, PA, ROT and ISO geometries, while are generally 10% higher than those of ICRP 116 from lateral geome- tries. At energies from 10−8 MeV to 1 MeV, the differ- ence is quite slight in AP (–5%), PA (–8%) and ROT (4%) geometries. However, a relatively large discrep- ancy is shown in lateral and ISO geometries at energies below 1 MeV, where the differences are 15% for LLAT, 20% for RLAT and 12% for ISO, respectively.
As discussed above, large discrepancies (up to 80%) in the organ dose conversion coefficients for Chinese reference phantoms and ICRP reference adult voxel phantoms are found at energies less than 2 MeV in AP, PA, RLAT, LLAT geometries. As for effective dose conversion coefficients, considerable deviations (up to 20%) are also seen at energies below 1MeV in lateral and ISO geometries between Chinese reference phan- toms and ICRP reference adult voxel phantoms. For high neutron energies, the differences of both the organ dose and effective dose conversion coefficients are rel- atively slight. Therefore, neutron dose conversion coef- ficients of Chinese reference adult phantoms were sug- gested to be used for calculating the Chinese adult organ dose and effective dose in radiation protection fields, especially for low-energy neutron energies.
Acknowledgment
The authors appreciate support for this paper by the Collab- orative Innovation Center of Public Safety. This work was supported by Chinese National Natural Science Foundation Project [grant number 11275110], [grant number 11375103],
and Chinese National Key Scientific Instrument and Equip- ment Development Projects [grant number 2012YQ180118].
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
