<title>Oxidative Stress in Radiation-Induced Cardiotoxicity</title>
<author>Zhang Ping   ,1 Yang Peng,2 Hong Lang,2 Cai Xinyong,2 Zeng Zhiyi,2 Wu Xiaocheng,2 Zeng Hong,2 and Shao Liang   2</author>
<Affiliation>1Department of Neurology, Jiangxi Provincial People’s Hospital Aﬃliated to Nanchang University, Nanchang, 330006 Jiangxi, China 2Department of Cardiology, Jiangxi Provincial People’s Hospital Aﬃliated to Nanchang University, Nanchang, 330006 Jiangxi, China</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral> Science and Technology of Nuclear Installation</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Hindawi</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1155/2020/3579143</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/3579143</URL>
There is a distinct increase in the risk of heart disease in people exposed to ionizing radiation (IR). Radiation-induced heart disease (RIHD) is one of the adverse side eﬀects when people are exposed to ionizing radiation. IR may come from various forms, such as diagnostic imaging, radiotherapy for cancer treatment, nuclear disasters, and accidents. However, RIHD was mainly observed after radiotherapy for chest malignant tumors, especially left breast cancer. Radiation therapy (RT) has become one of the main ways to treat all kinds of cancer, which is used to reduce the recurrence of cancer and improve the survival rate of patients. The potential cause of radiation-induced cardiotoxicity is unclear, but it may be relevant to oxidative stress. Oxidative stress, an accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), disrupts intracellular homeostasis through chemical modiﬁcation and damages proteins, lipids, and DNA; therefore, it results in a series of related pathophysiological changes. The purpose of this review was to summarise the studies of oxidative stress in radiotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity and provide prevention and treatment methods to reduce cardiac damage.
1. Introduction
Radiotherapy plays an important role in the treatment of many  cancers.  As  the  use  of  radiotherapy  is  becoming increasingly frequent, and since the overall patient survival rate is high, the risks associated with radiotherapy must be carefully considered. Among these risks, cardiovascular dis- eases (CVDs) have always attracted much attention, since CVD is the leading cause of nonmalignant tumor-related deaths in cancer survivors [1].
In a clinical setting, gamma rays and X-rays are the most commonly  used  types  of  ionizing  radiation.  Radiation- induced cardiotoxicity depends on the type and dose of radi- ation [2]. Clinical studies have shown that a radiation dose of 1–4Gy promotes the development of CVD and inﬂamma- tion [3]. A radiation dose of 5–8Gy increases the possibility of  myocardial  infarction  (MI),  angina,  pericarditis,  and decreased left ventricular diameter, while radiation doses of more  than  8Gy  cause  myocardial  ﬁbrosis,  which  usually occurs  after  irradiation  for  Hodgkin’s  lymphoma  (HL) [4–6]. At doses above 30Gy, the risk of radiation-related
heart disease becomes signiﬁcant if the patient is exposed for a year or two; however, the latent period of radiation-related heart disease is longer and disease can occur more than a few decades later if exposure has been at lower radiation doses [7]. Studies have shown that in an experiment with a larger- than-average cardiac radiation dose, the risk of heart death increased signiﬁcantly by approximately 3% per Gy of radia- tion dose [2, 7]. Radiotherapy is now used for approximately half of all malignant tumors and is the basic treatment for HL and breast cancer  [8]. Nevertheless, radiation-induced coronary heart disease is the second most common cause of mortality and incidence in patients with breast cancer and HL treated with radiotherapy [9]. The use of high doses of radiation  in  the  treatment  of cancer  has  been  shown  to damage  heart  tissue,  leading  to  cardiac  dysfunction  and CVD [2]. The available data show that the higher the radi- ation dose, the stronger is the cardiotoxicity, and the risk of cardiovascular complications is also increased. Moreover, the  risk  of cardiovascular  complications  in  patients  who received radiotherapy for left breast cancer was signiﬁcantly higher than the risk in patients who received radiotherapy for right breast cancer [10]. Although the beneﬁt of radio- therapy is obvious, increasing attention has been paid to the cardiac damage induced by radiotherapy, which would sug- gest limiting the  dose  and use  of radiotherapy in  cancer patients [11]. Modern radiotherapy techniques may not have decreased cardiac toxicity even though they have reduced the exposure of the heart to radiation [12]. A number of studies have emphasized the role of oxidative stress and inﬂamma- tion in radiation-induced cardiovascular damage and have shown that most chemotherapeutic drugs and radiotherapy can increase oxidative stress. Therefore, antioxidative stress has become an important therapeutic target for radiation- induced cardiotoxicity.
Chest  radiotherapy  is  used  to  eﬀectively  treat  some malignant tumors, such as HL and breast cancer. However, the incidence of cardiovascular events in these patients has increased for years, especially among young survivors who do not have traditional risk factors [13]. Oxidative stress in cells is the main factor of CVD [14]. Oxidative stress repre- sents  the  imbalance  between  the  production  of  reactive ROS  and  the  scavenging  of ROS  by the  cell  antioxidant defense system, thus, mediating the damage of cell structure, including lipids, proteins, and DNA  [15]. Oxidative stress and  ROS  production  have  always been  considered  to be important  pathophysiological  mediators  leading  to  CVD. Chronic and acute overproduction of ROS under pathophys- iological conditions is an important part of the development of CVD [16]. In general, there is a considerable amount of data indicating that oxidative stress and ROS are related to the pathophysiology of CVD  [17]. The eﬀect of oxidative stress  on  radiation-induced  cardiotoxicity may be  mainly owing to the oxidative damage of biological macromolecules (DNA, protein, and lipids) and a series of molecular signaling pathways mediated by ROS through the excessive production of ROS.
1.1. Formation of ROS. As illustrated in Figure 1, oxidative
stress refers to the imbalance between oxidants and antioxi- dants, which is favorable to oxidants and leads to harmful eﬀects [15]. Oxidants, also known as ROS, include superox- ide radical anions (O2-), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hydroxyl radical  (OH-),  and  singlet  oxygen.  In  addition,  they  also contain  some  nitrogen  oxides,  lipid  peroxide  free  radical (LOO), and hypochlorous acid (HOCl) [14, 18]. ROS in the cardiovascular system come from endogenous sources, such as  NADPH  oxidases,  mitochondria,  xanthine  oxidases, cyclooxygenase (COX), lipoxygenase (LPO), and uncoupled nitric oxide synthases  (NOSs); exogenous sources of ROS include chemical toxins, radiation, ultraviolet rays, cigarette smoke,  and  drugs.  These  sources  result  in  elevated  ROS concentrations and subsequent cardiovascular tissue damage [14, 19]. Mitochondria are the major sites of intracellular oxygen consumption, and the respiratory chain of mitochon- dria is the main source of ROS, which has an important eﬀect on the cardiovascular system [20]. IR can directly cause the respiratory  chain  of mitochondria to breakup,  leading to respiratory chain dysfunction and thus reducing ATP pro- duction, increasing ROS production, reducing antioxidant capacity,  and  inducing  apoptosis  [21].  NADPH  oxidase
Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity
(NOXs) is the main enzymatic source of ROS in the cardio- vascular system  [22]. Among them, NOX2 and NOX4 are the most abundant in the heart and are expressed in cardio- myocytes and endothelial cells. These enzymes catalyze the transfer of electrons from NADPH to oxygen molecules to produce oxygen free radicals [23]. In addition, the late eﬀects of radiation therapy are caused by the ionization of water molecules in the surrounding environment and the genera- tion of chronic free radicals induced by radiation [24]. Radi- ation can not only change the upstream source of ROS but also change the balance of endogenous antioxidant defense mechanisms, including glutathione, ascorbic acid, catalase, and superoxide dismutase (SOD) [25]. The inhibition of anti- oxidant enzymes is one of the important eﬀects of ionizing radiation  on  irradiated  organs  and  oﬀ-site  organs, which leads  to  the  production  and  accumulation  of ROS  [26]. ROS can react randomly with cellular lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, and cause oxidative stress, thus damaging these macromolecules [25].
1.2. ROS-Mediated Oxidative Damage to Biomacromolecules. ROS are a kind of small reaction molecule and play a key role in regulating cell function and biological process [27]. ROS are highly reactive and can interact with biological macro- molecules, such as DNA, proteins, and lipids, and can pro- duce various pathological manifestations via changing the function of these macromolecules [15].
1.2.1.  DNA  Oxidation.  Radiation  directly  and  indirectly aﬀects  heart  tissue.  Radiation  may  interact  directly  with DNA and cause DNA damage [28]. The ROS produced by the radiation decomposition of water molecules and the sur- rounding DNA molecules are considered the indirect eﬀect [29]. The IR-induced DNA damage is mainly caused by indi- rect  eﬀects,  including  base  damage,  cross-linking,  single- strand break (SSBS), and double-strand break (DSBS). In these lesions, they can be either alone or in combination with another,  resulting  in  complex  DNA  damage,  with  DSBS being the most severe [30]. The oxidative damage of DNA can change gene expression, resulting in protein modiﬁca- tion, cell death, and genome instability [29]. The mitochon- drial respiratory system is the main source of ROS in cells. They  are  by-products  of the  transfer  of  electrons  from NADH  or  FADH  to  molecular  oxygen  under  normal physiological  conditions,  and  these  toxic by-products  are treated by antioxidants and free radical scavenging enzymes, including  manganese   superoxide   dismutase   (Mn-SOD), catalase (CAT), and glutathione peroxidase (GPX) in mito- chondria[31].However,owingtothelackofchromatinstruc- ture, histone protection,  and  an ineﬃcient repair  system, mtDNA is vulnerable to oxidative stress-related damage. If not repaired, it will lead to the destruction of the electronic transport chain and produce more ROS, which exceeds the protective ability of the antioxidant system [20, 31]. Reactive oxygen-induced mitochondrial DNA oxidative damage and mitochondrial damage lead to the pathological production of ROS,  and  the  formation  of the vicious  cycle  leads  to cell energy consumption and apoptosis. The accumulation of  mitochondrial  DNA  oxidative  damage  can  lead  to Figure 1: Formation of ROS after radiation and the general manifestation of cardiotoxicity. As described in the article, the sources of ROS are varied,  even  under the  radiation  conditions.  IR can  directly cause the  respiratory chain  of mitochondria to breakup  and  cause the decomposition of water molecules, leading to respiratory chain dysfunction and ROS production, reducing antioxidant capacity. NADPH oxidase is a family of multisubunit complex enzymes that catalyze the conversion of oxygen into O2-  by using NADPH as an electron source, which is present in vascular endothelia cells, smooth muscle cells, ﬁbroblasts, and cardiomyocytes. The mechanism of uncoupled NOSs is similar to NADPH oxidase. Xanthine oxidase catalyzes the conversion of xanthine to uric acid while H2O2  and O2-  are generated at the same time. In addition, COX-2 and 5-LPO produce PGH2 accompanied by ROS formation during catalytic arachidonic acid metabolism. ROS can interact with macrobiomolecules (DNA, protein, and lipid), causing oxidation of DNA, proteins, and lipids and cause cardiac damage through some signaling pathways, which are described in article above. The cardiac damage includes pericardial disease, coronary heart disease, heart valve disease, conduction disorders, and cardiomyopathy.
mitochondrial  dysfunction,  which  is  an  important  cause of some human diseases, including CVD  [20].
1.2.2. Protein Oxidation. Oxidative stress by ROS produced
after  radiation  can  lead  to  chain  breaks,  protein  charge changes,  protein  cross-linking,  and  oxidation  of  speciﬁc amino acids, resulting in increased susceptibility to a partic- ular protease-degrading protein.  Cysteine and methionine residues in the protein are particularly sensitive to oxidation. The oxidation of the base or methionine residue can cause conformational change, protein expansion, and degradation [15]. Oxidative stress-induced protein oxidative modiﬁcation before protein degradation or inactivation increased. A pre- vious study has shown that homocysteamine was common in  irradiated  endothelial  cells,  and  the  increased  level  of homocysteine was  associated with various human  CVDs, including atherosclerosis [32]. Oxidative damage of proteins in vivo may aﬀect the function of receptors, enzymes, trans- porters, etc., and cause secondary damage to other biomole- cules  [33].  As  one  of the  main  protein  targets  of ROS, Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent  protein  kinase  II   (CaMKII) plays  a  key  role  in  the  pathophysiology  of CVDs  [34]. CaMKII is a serine-threonine kinase. There are four known subtypes: α, β, γ, and δ . δ subtypes play a dominant role in the heart. CaMKII is activated not only by binding calcium- bound calmodulin (Ca2+/CaM) but also by oxidation  [35]. The oxidation of CaMKII is carried out by ROS, and in the presence of ROS, methionine 281 and 282 in CaMKII are oxi- dized  [36]. In the domain of Ca2+/CaM-binding CaMKII,
oxidation of M281/282 leads to enzyme  activation which inhibits  the  recombination  between  a  regulatory  subunit and  a  catalytic  subunit,  thus  perpetuating  the  activity  of CaMKII [34]. The eﬀect of CaMKII enhanced by oxidation is complex and widely present in the cardiac muscle cells, and the excessive activation of CaMKII may be related to car- diomyopathy and abnormal excitation-contraction coupling (ECC), heart failure, and arrhythmia [35, 36].
1.2.3. Lipid Peroxidation.  The  main  mechanisms  for  free
radical-induced cell and tissue damage include the formation of lipid peroxides in the cell membrane and organelles. This process begins when the free radical is extracted from poly- unsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) to form a fatty acid radical. The biologically active lipid peroxidation radical can react with other lipids, proteins, or nucleic acids to facilitate the transfer of electrons and the oxidation of the substrate. These organic radicals perpetuate the chain reaction by attacking additional side chains, resulting in the formation of a lipid peroxide [37]. In general, lipid peroxide can be described as the process of oxidants (such as free radicals) attacking lipids containing  carbon  double  bonds,  especially  PUFA  [28]. PUFA, in particular linoleic acid and arachidonic acid, are an  important  target  of  lipid  peroxide.  Malondialdehyde (MDA)  and  4-hydroxy-2-non-ene  (HNE)  are  the  most important products of lipid oxidation [21]. ROS can induce lipid  peroxide  and  destroy  the  bilayer  arrangement  of
membrane  lipids,  which  may  lead  to  the  inactivation  of membrane-binding receptors and enzymes and increase the
permeability of tissues. Lipid peroxidation products, such as MDA and unsaturated aldehyde, can inactivate many cell proteins by forming protein cross-linking. HNE can lead to intracellular glutathione (GSH) depletion and induce perox- ide production, activate epidermis growth factor receptor, and induce ﬁbronectin production [15]. Because the myocar- dial cell membrane is rich in phospholipids which are partic- ularly  sensitive  to  oxidative  stress  and  the  antioxidant capacity is low, the myocardium is particularly vulnerable to oxidative damage of free radicals produced by ionizing radiation. Lipid peroxidation in the myocardial cell mem- brane can lead to injury of the myocardial structure and impaired function [38]. In addition, lipid peroxide also exists in the oxidation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) [28]. Ath- erosclerosis is the pathological basis of coronary heart disease and is closely related to oxidative LDL. Inﬁltration and accu- mulation of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL) in the endothelial cells occur after endothelial injury. Monocytes diﬀerentiate into macrophages and express scavenging recep- tors (SRS), such as CD36, SRA, and LOX-1 [27]. Oxidized LDL (OxLDL) attracts macrophages directly and is phago- cytic by macrophages. Because OxLDL is resistant to macro- phage lysosomal acidic proteolytes, the OxLDL collected by macrophages  is not  digested  and  decomposed by macro- phages. Over time, OxLDL accumulates more and more in macrophages and converts macrophages into cells contain- ing a lot of fat in cytoplasm, called foam cells [19]. In addi- tion, ROS induces the expression of SRS in smooth muscle cells and converts them into foam cells. The presence of foam cells in the arterial wall is a sign of early atherosclerosis. Var- ious studies have shown that OxLDL can induce endothelial
cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and macrophages to pro- duce ROS, and ROS and cytokines released by inﬂammatory cells  may  stimulate  smooth  muscle  cell  migration  and collagen synthesis, leading to the formation of atherosclerotic plaques [27].
1.3.   Molecular   Signaling  Pathway   of   Cardiac   Toxicity
Mediated by ROS. Irradiation of normal tissues can lead to a  sharp  increase  in  ROS  and  reactive  nitrogen  species (RNS), which include nitric oxide (NO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and peroxynitrite (ONOO-). ROS/RNS are free radi- cals which are associated with the oxygen atom (O) or their equivalents and have stronger reactivitywith other molecules. ROS/RNS as intracellular and intercellular signals change the function of cells and tissues [39]. In the case of chest irradia- tion, exposure of the heart, blood vessels, and other tissues leads to tissue remodeling and adverse cardiovascular events. This complex process is composed of a large number of inter- acting molecular signals, including cytokines, chemotactic factors, nuclear transcription factors, and growth factors [28].
1.3.1. TGF-β1 and Oxidative Stress. As shown in Figure 2,
radiation-induced vascular injury and endothelial dysfunc- tion  are  partly  mediated  by  transforming  growth  factor- (TGF-) β, which plays a key role in radiation-induced ﬁbrosis [40]. ROS produced by radiation is an immediate activating agent  of TGF-β1,  and  the  activated  TGF-β1  initiates  an upregulation  of  collagen  synthesis  in  a  dose-dependent
Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity
manner [41]. ROS can result in TGF-β1 activation, thrombin production, platelet activation, and proinﬂammatory signal activation to promote myoﬁbroblast accumulation and extra- cellular matrix (ECM) production. ROS is activated through a forward feedback loop by TGF-β1 to amplify these ﬁbrosis signals.  Radiation-induced  ROS  release  TGF-β1  together with  ECM,  causing  oxidative  damage  to  DNA,  proteins, and lipids [42]. TGF-β1 activates two signal pathways, the Smad pathway and the TAK1/MKK3/p38 pathway, through a special nuclear signal transducer molecule called TRAF6. Collagen synthesis is controlled by these two pathways in the steady state [42, 43]. In the classical signaling pathway, TGF-β recruits a complex of Type I  (TbRI) and Type II (TbRII) transmembrane receptors to induce the phosphory- lation of Smad protein and induce the accumulation of Smad protein in the nucleus to regulate the expression of target genes  [44]. Many inﬂammatory cytokines,  especially IL-6 and IL-8, are involved in the Smad pathway, which mediate collagen synthesis and lead to rational ﬁbrosis and dysfunc- tion in heart disease. TAK1/MKK3/p38 signal transduction is  the  key  to  autophagy-dependent  collagen  degradation. TGF-β1 can also reduce the synthesis of proteolytic enzymes and increase the synthesis of protease inhibitors to degrade matrix and downregulate autophagy-mediated collagen deg- radation, which may further promote TGF-β1-related events [42]. Radiation-induced coronary heart disease (RICHD) is a late eﬀect of radiation exposure, with tissue ﬁbrosis as the common end point. Fibrosis of the coronary and carotid arteries may destroy the normal blood supply of the heart muscle, leading to ischemia and heart failure [30].
1.3.2. IGF-1 and Oxidative Stress. Insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF-1) is a primary mediator of the eﬀects of growth hor- mones and is itself structurally similar to insulin [45]. The assembly structure of the IGF-1 receptor  (IGF-1R) is the same as that of the insulin receptor, and the homology of kinase domain β is more than 80%. Therefore, IGF-1 and insulin have at least two main signal transduction pathways (PI3K-dependent and PI3K-independent pathways) through their homologous receptor and cross-activation [46]. Among them,   the   most   important   cardiovascular   function   of IGF-1 comprises the two main ways of regulating vascular tension:  through  the  anti-inﬂammatory/antioxidant  stress IRS/PI3K/Akt pathway and through the proinﬂammatory and  oxidative  stress  Grb/Shc/MAPK  (PI3K-independent) pathway [47]. The activation of the IRS/PI3K/Akt pathway leads  to  eNOS  phosphorylation  of Ser1179  and  the  pro- duction of nitric oxide (NO) within minutes. In the pres- ence of BH4, eNOS produces NO during the conversion of L-arginine  to  L-citrulline.  In  the  absence  of BH4,  eNOS uncoupling  catalysis  forms  a  superoxide  instead  of NO [17]. NO, a powerful vasodilator with antithrombotic and anti-inﬂammatory characteristics,  is  involved  in  oxidative stress and chronic endothelial activation and inﬂammation [48]. NO has an important protective eﬀect on maintaining normal cardiovascular function. Excessive ROS production can reduce the bioavailability of NO, which is the main factor for  the  occurrence  and  development  of CVDs  [49].  For example, the activation of NF-κB after radiation is inhibited
Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity                                                                                                                                 5
Platelet activation
TGF-1
Radiation
ROS
TRAF6
TAK1/MKK3/p38
IL-6, IL-8
Collagen synthesis
Autophagy
Collagen degradation
Fibrosis environment
Atheroscierosis and ischemic heart disease
Heart failure
Figure 2: Oxidative stress in TGF-β1-mediated ﬁbrosis. Radiation induces reactive oxygen species (ROS), and ROS can activate TGF-β1, resulting in the generation of thrombin and the activation of platelets to promote further production of ROS and TGF-β1. TGF-β1 binds to Type I (TbRI) and Type II (TbRII) transmembrane receptors, activating the Smad pathway and the TAK1/MKK3/p38 pathway through the  speciﬁc  nuclear  signaling  transduction  molecule,  TRAF6.  The  Smad  pathway  requires  a  number  of inﬂammatory  cytokines,  in particular IL-6 and IL-8, to mediate collagen synthesis. TGF-β1 activates the TAK1/MKK3/p38 signaling pathway and downregulates autophagy-mediated collagen degradation, which may further promote the synthesis of collagen, form a ﬁbrotic environment, cause atherosclerosis and ischemic heart disease, and may even lead to heart failure.
by NO, and therefore, a decrease in the bioavailability of NO may promote the development of vascular inﬂammation and atherosclerosis  [40].  IGF-1  stimulates  the  expression  of endothelin-1   (ET-1)   by   activating   the   Shc/Grb/MAPK pathway via IGF-R, IR, or a hybrid receptor [17]. ET-1 is a powerful  vasoconstrictive  peptide  secreted  by  endothelial cells. It can antagonize the vasodilation eﬀect of NO and has the characteristics of promoting oxidation and inﬂam- mation [50]. Research on mice has shown that IGF-1 pro- vides radiation protection, and the use of IGF-1 inhibitors enhances the sensitivity of cancer cells to radiotherapy [51]. As demonstrated by Kenchegowda et al. in 2018, IGF-1 levels were increased in irradiated minipigs but a positive correla- tion was observed between elevated IGF-1 levels after radia- tion and cardiac adverse events. It was further proven that the IGF-1/PI3K/Akt pathway was inhibited while the MAPK pathway remained active, resulting in the transformation of the  IGF-1  signal  to  an  oxidative  and  proinﬂammatory environment,  which  led  to  selective  resistance  of  IGF-1 [45]. Furthermore, other pathological stimuli such as ROS
and inﬂammatory cytokines can cause selective inhibition of the IRS/PI3K/Akt pathway and even enhance the MAPK signal pathway [47]. Selective IGF-1 resistance has recently been considered to be a new radiation injury mechanism related to inﬂammation and endothelial dysfunction  [52]. The inhibition of the IRS/PI3K/Akt/eNOS signal transduc-
tion pathway and the activation of the Grb/Shc/MAPK/ET pathway lead to an imbalance between NO and ET-1, result- ing in endothelial dysfunction and CVD  [47]. Endothelial dysfunction refers to a complex pathological state, which is characterized by a series of events, including damage of the endothelial barrier, damage of vasodilation and contraction, decrease of NO production, increase of adhesion molecule expression, increase of cytokine levels, and ROS produced by endothelial cells. Endothelial dysfunction helps promote ﬁbrosis and an inﬂammatory environment, leading to ﬁbro- sis  as  a  secondary  eﬀect,  which  is  a  common  feature  of radiation-induced tissue damage [32]. The injury of vascular endothelial cells plays an important role in radiation-induced heart  injury  [48].  The  overall  results  of IGF-1  resistance include vasoconstriction, decrease of blood ﬂow, hypoperfu- sion, and a further increase of oxidative stress, which leads to the increase of ROS level and the formation of a vicious cycle. ROS can promote the inhibition of the PI3/Akt pathway, decrease the bioavailability of NO, and induce the production of ET-1, leading to vascular dysfunction, inﬂammation, and thrombosis, and ultimately to the occurrence and develop- ment of atherosclerosis [45]. Moreover, endothelial injury is often accompanied by myocardial injury, which results in collagen  deposition  in  the  capillary  cavity,  stenosis  of blood vessels, and deterioration of myocardial blood supply, forming  a  vicious  cycle  of myocardial  blood  supply  and
Figure 3: Radiation induced IGF-1 selective resistance. Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) is structurally similar to insulin. It can activate the IRS/PI3K/Akt pathway (PI3K dependent) and the Grb/Shc/MAPK pathway (PI3K independent) through IGF-R, IR, or the hybrid receptor. However, radiation can inhibit the anti-inﬂammatory and antioxidant stress of the IRS/PI3K/Akt signaling pathway but not inhibit the inﬂammatory MAPK kinase pathway, which leads to the transformation of the IGF-1 signal to the oxidation and inﬂammatory environment, which leads to selective resistance of IGF-1. ROS can also cause selective inhibition of IRS/PI3K/Akt pathway and even enhance the MAPK signaling pathway. IGF-1 selective resistance causes an imbalance between NO and ET-1 production, resulting in endothelial dysfunction, resulting in oxidative stress and inﬂammatory level and further leads to the occurrence and development of radiation-induced heart diseases.
continuous  ﬁbrosis  and  remodeling  [53].  This  process  is described in Figure 3.
1.3.3. NF-κB and Oxidative Stress. As shown in Figure 4, ROS
form an important intermediate and second messenger acti- vated by NF-κB through upstream stimuli, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-1 (IL-1) [54]. NF-κB belongs  to  the  family  of inducible  transcription  factors. NF-κB  regulates  diﬀerent  biological  processes,  including immune response, inﬂammation, cell proliferation, and apo- ptosis. NF-κB binds to inhibitor protein IKB (IκBα, in partic- ular, has been extensively studied) to form protein complexes and remains inactive [28]. When cells are exposed to ionizing radiation,oxidativestressoccursrapidly.Theactivationofthe TNFreceptorandtheIL-1receptor, theupstream receptorsof the typical signaling pathway of NF-κB, further activates the IKK complex (primarily IKKβ) composed of IKKα and IKKβ (catalytic kinase), which phosphorylates IκBα on serines 32 and 36, resulting in the phosphorylation and degradation of IKB protein and the activation and translocation of NF-κB to the nucleus [55]. It can bind to various promoter regions of its target genes and induce transcription of corresponding genes,  most  of which  are  involved  in  the  regulation  of inﬂammation  [28, 56]. NF-κB target genes include COX-2 and 5-LPO, and these two are the sources of ROS generation. 5-LPO,  similar  to  COX-2,  produces  prostaglandin  H2 (PGH2) accompanied by ROS formation during catalytic ara- chidonic acid metabolism, and intracellular ROS production can  directly  activate  NF-κB   [55].  Therefore,  a  positive feedback loop can be formed between NF-κB and ROS. ROS
activates NF-κB, which in turn increases the production of ROS by  increasing  the  expression  of COX-2  and  5-LPO [19]. In addition, NF-κB is activated by oxidative stress after radiation, which targets the production of many genes related to inﬂammation, including intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAM),vascularcelladhesion molecules(VCAM),andcyto- kines, and promotes the upregulation of thrombus formation markers[40].Furthermore,NF-κBupregulatestheexpression of cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF. These cytokines increase inﬂammation not only by attracting white blood cells but also by activating NF-κB [57, 58]. Thus, the inﬂammatory state of atherosclerosis may again form a positive self-regulatory loop [19]. This proinﬂammatory environment, coupled with colla- gen  deposition  and  increased  ﬁbroblasts,  leads  to  tissue remodeling, myocardial ﬁbrosis, and atherosclerosis, which is one of the end-stage symptoms of radiation-induced heart disease  [54].  In  addition,  the  inﬂammation  regulated  by NF-κB  is  also  associated  with  myocardial  injury induced by radiation. Because of the increased expression of intercell adhesion molecules and vascular cell adhesion molecules, the adhesion of leukocytes to the endothelial cells and the throm- bus  can prevent the vascular  cavity from  causing micro- thrombus  and  vascular  occlusion,  thereby  causing  ﬁlling defects and focal ischemia, followed by further myocardial cell death and ﬁbrosis [28].
1.3.4. IL-4 and Oxidative Stress. IL-4 has long been consid-
ered to be an eﬀective ﬁbrogenic factor because it can induce the synthesis of ECM protein, collagen, and ﬁbronectin [59]. Recent  studies  have  shown  that  IL-4  and  IL-13  are  of
Figure 4: The relationship between oxidative stress and NF-κB. In normal cases, NF-κB combines with the inhibitor protein (IKB) to form a protein complex and remain in an inactive state. However, when the cells are exposed to ionizing radiation, oxidative stress reactions, such as NADPH oxidase activity, improved and mitochondrial electron transport is impaired and occurs rapidly, and reactive oxygen species is excessively generated in response to oxidative stress, which stimulates the inﬂammatory cells to produce IL-1 and TNF. IL-1 and TNF bind to the IL-1 receptor and the TNF receptor, respectively, to activate the downstream NF-κB signal. The IKB protein is phosphorylated and NF-κB is activated and translocated to the nucleus, which binds to the various promoter regions of its target gene and induces the transcription of a corresponding inﬂammation-related gene. The activated NF-κB induced the expression of COX-2 and 5-LPO, resulting in the generation of ROS, the formation of a positive feedback loop, and increased levels of inﬂammation and oxidative stress, and the intracellular  ROS  can  activate NF-κB  directly.  In  addition, the  activation  of NF-κB  also results  in  an  increase  in the  expression  of intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAM) and vascular cell adhesion molecules (VCAM). In addition, NF-κB upregulated the expression of cytokines  such  as  IL-1  and  TNF.  These  cytokines  increase  inﬂammation  not  only  by  attracting  white  blood  cells  but  also  by activating NF-κB. Thus, the inﬂammation state of atherosclerosis may again form a positive self-regulatory loop, forming proinﬂammatory and ﬁbrotic environments, leading to tissue remodeling, myocardial ﬁbrosis, and atherosclerosis.
importance in the late cardiac eﬀects induced by ionizing radiation  [60]. IL-4 and IL-13 are mainly secreted by Th2 lymphocytes  and  act  on  a variety  of tissues  to  stimulate collagen synthesis [61]. These cytokines may induce chronic oxidative stress, inﬂammation, and ﬁbrosis by upregulating dual  oxidase  1  (DUOX1)  and  dual  oxidase  2  (DUOX2). DUOX is also known as an NADPH oxidase, one of the main sources   of  ROS   [60].   DUOX1   and   DUOX2   are   two membrane-dependent subfamilies of oxidoreductase, which catalyze the conversion of oxygen (O2) to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). The two enzymes are very similar and can produce a large amount of H2O2 after activation. The abnormal upreg- ulation of these enzymes may lead to the destruction of nor- mal  function  and  the  increase  of oxidative  damage  [62]. Chronic oxidative stress and inﬂammation can lead to ﬁbro- sis and hypertrophy, which may undermine normal cardiac function  and  myocardial  blood  supply  [63].  A  study  by Farhood et al. in 2017 showed that irradiation increased the
level of IL-4 but not the level of IL-13 in rats. The results of real-time PCR showed that radiation induced the upregula- tion of IL4ra1 (IL-4 receptor), DUOX1, and DUOX2; the changes induced by IL4ra1 and DUOX1 were the most obvi- ous [62]. In addition to DUOX1 and DUOX2, IL-4 can also
induce the upregulation of TGF-β, a powerful stimulator of ﬁbrosis  [63].  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  activation  of the TGF-β pathway mediates collagen synthesis, promotes tissue ﬁbrosis,  and  plays  an  important  role  in  late  radiation- induced cardiac toxicity.
1.4.     Clinical     Manifestations     of     Radiation-Induced
Cardiotoxicity. The use of high doses of radiation in cancer treatment has been shown to damage heart tissue, leading to  cardiac  dysfunction  and  CVD  [2].  Radiation-induced CVDscanincludepericardialdisease,coronaryarterydisease, valvular heart disease, conduction disease, and cardiomyopa- thy [8, 13]. Heart disease caused by radiotherapy develops slowly and occurs 20–30 years after radiotherapy [24].
1.4.1. Radiation-Induced Pericardial Disease. Pericardial dis-
ease is a common and classic complication of mediastinal radiotherapy; its types include acute pericarditis, pericardial eﬀusion,  delayed  thickening,  and  constrictive  pericarditis [13]. In a postmortem study, 20 cancer patients with a history of mediastinal radiotherapy were examined. 70% (14) of the patients had pericardial disease, the most common of which was exudative or constrictive disease [64]. The symptoms of
these  patients  developed  at  diﬀerent  times  and  appeared three to ﬁve years after radiation [13]. Acute pericarditis usu- ally occurs during radiotherapy or within a few weeks after radiotherapy, and the exudate is ﬁbroid. It is usually caused by  high-dose  (40Gy)  radiation  therapy  for  mediastinal tumors, especially HL  [40]. However, acute pericarditis is now rare owing to new radiotherapy techniques, such as deep inspiratory breath-holding (DIBH) and accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI), which signiﬁcantly reduce the dose of cardiac radiation exposure  [62, 65]. The patients could show fever, pleurisy and chest pain, abnormal electrocardio- gram, and slight elevation of cardiac markers. The disease is usually self-limited and eﬀectively treated by nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory  drugs   (NSAID)  and  colchicine   [62]. Radiation-induced chronic pericarditis often has no relative symptoms, but  it  can be  disguised  as  angina  or  it  could coexist with angina  [9]. It is important to note, however, that  chronic  pericardial  diseases  can  develop  months  to years  after radiotherapy treatment and may lead to large pericardial ﬂuid accumulation. Excessive accumulation may lead to pericardial tamponade. Symptoms and signs, such as dyspnea, accompanied by distal heart sound, hypotension, and  a  dilated jugular vein,  may be  diagnostic  indicators. Echocardiography is still the golden standard for determinis- tic diagnosis [53]. Constrictive pericarditis is usually one of the  most  serious  complications,  and  diuretics  are  usually the  ﬁrst  line  of defense;  however,  the  ﬁnal  treatment  is pericardiectomy  [8, 13].
1.4.2. Radiation-Induced Coronary Heart Disease. RICHD is
the  second  most  common  cause  of onset  and  death  in patients with breast cancer, HL, and other common medias- tinal malignant tumors. The risk of RICHD increases with the  increase  of the radiation  dose. Exposed patients may develop a variety of symptoms after decades of treatment, including asymptomatic myocardial perfusion defects, sto- matal  processes,  triple-vessel  disease,  and  sudden  cardiac death [9]. In terms of pathology, RICHD and common coro- nary heart disease diﬀer in some respects. RICHD lesions tend to be long, preferentially aﬀecting the ostial area of the coronary arteries, and the collagen and ﬁbrin content in the formed inﬂammatory plaques are high and the fat content is low [62]. Acharya et al. in 2018 studied a case of coronary artery disease caused by radiotherapy for breast cancer and found severe, isolated bilateral coronary artery oriﬁce lesions [66].  The  typical  manifestation  of RICHD  is  that young patients with typical angina symptoms do not have risk fac- tors for ischemic heart disease, and coronary artery occlusion involves more frequently the coronary artery opening and proximal coronary artery segment than the distal coronary artery segment  [9, 48]. Although there are few traditional cardiovascular risk factors in patients with radiation coro- nary heart disease, if such risk factors such as hyperlipidemia exist, the progress of atherosclerosis might be accelerated [66]; and even though angina  symptoms are common in patients with  RICHD, nonanginal  chest pain is the most common in the ﬁrst 2–3 years after chest irradiation and/or mastectomy,  accounting  for  approximately  50%  of breast cancer survivors [9]. Patients with radiation coronary heart
Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity
disease  have  a  higher  risk  of  asymptomatic  myocardial infarction  than  the  general  population.  The  treatment  of radiation-induced  coronary artery disease, however, is no diﬀerent.  Cardiac  surgery, including angioplasty,  stenting, or bypass grafting may be used, but it may be more techni- cally diﬃcult and the procedure is more complex [67].
1.4.3. Radiation-Induced Valvular Heart Disease. Early heart valve  injury  caused  by  radiation  is  usually  manifested through the thickening and calciﬁcation of the valve and lob- ule. These abnormalities rarely show clinical symptoms, but in imaging studies, the detection rate of valvular lesions was 60% and it was as high as 80% in autopsies [67]. Radiation- induced valvular disease can develop from intimal thicken- ing, no dysfunction to asymptomatic valvular dysfunction, and eventually symptomatic valvular stenosis or regurgita- tion [48]. Radiotherapy was found to increase the clinical risk of severe valvular disease, especially when the dose is above 30Gy, with aortic valve involvement being the most frequent [68]. Aortic regurgitation is the most common valvular dis- ease, but most patients show mild valve injury [13]. Aortic and mitral valves are more likely to be involved than tricus- pid and pulmonary valves [8]. Valvular stenosis can occur 20 years after radiotherapy, and aortic stenosis is the most common type when valvular stenosis occurs [62]. Echocardi- ography has shown abnormal calciﬁcation of aortic inter- valvular ﬁbers and of the anterior mitral valve in patients with mild valve injury. Heart souﬄe and echocardiography suggest that valvular disease should be examined by echocar- diography on a regular basis. Surgical treatment should be considered for patients with severe valvular disease [8].
1.4.4.  Radiation-Induced  Conduction  Dysfunction.  Radio-
therapy may aﬀect the conduction system of the heart, lead- ing to various types of arrhythmias  [69]. The conduction system after radiation is rarely involved, but the range of the  electrocardiogram  after  irradiation  shows  prolonged nonspeciﬁc  ST-T,  QT  interval,  decreased  voltage,  right bundle branch block, and sinus tachycardia [48]. Common conduction disorders occur quickly after radiation, including nonspeciﬁc repolarization changes, which are usually tran- sient and asymptomatic, while severe abnormalities includ- ing atrioventricular node bradycardia, all levels of cardiac block, and sick sinus syndrome are known to occur many years after radiotherapy [48]. The abnormality of the con- duction system may be caused directly by radiation or indi- rectly  by  the  ﬁbrosis  and  ischemia  of  the  myocardium caused  by  radiation  therapy,  in  which  the  right  bundle branch  block  is  most  common  because  the  right  bundle branch is located in the vicinity of the endocardium and is most likely to be damaged during radiotherapy [48]. Com- plete heart block is a serious and delayed manifestation of radiation-induced  cardiac  damage,  requiring  pacemaker
implantation [8, 13].
1.4.5. Radiation-Induced Cardiomyopathy. Myocardial injury after radiation is related to microvascular injury,  such  as the  decrease  of microvessel  density,  the  loss  of alkaline phosphatase in vascular endothelial cells, and the increased
Table 1: Antioxidants and their eﬀects.
expression  of von  Willebrand  factor.  Acute  myocarditis is  associated  with  inﬂammation  caused  by  radiotherapy, accompanied  by  transient  ST,  T  wave  electrocardiogram abnormalities, and myocardial dysfunction [8]. Myocardial ﬁbrosisinducedbyradiotherapydevelopsthroughthesepara- tion and replacement of proliferating collagen from the cardi- omyocytes,whichmayleadtoischemicheartdiseaseandeven heart failure [2]. Myocardial ﬁbrosis usually develops when a patientisexposedtohighdosesofradiotherapy,andradiation myocardial ﬁbrosis is usually asymptomatic in the early stage andcanbedetectedatleast10yearsafterradiotherapy[38].In the late stage of myocardial injury, diﬀuse myocardial ﬁbrosis complicated with severe diastolic dysfunction leads to restric- tive cardiomyopathy [8]. Radiation-induced cardiomyopathy can be characterized by dilated or restricted phenotypes. But on the whole, radiotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy is more common than restrictive cardiomyopathy. The coexistence of radiation-induced  cardiomyopathy and pericardial  disease may be one of the causes of heart failure [13]. Cardiomyopa- thy is usually characterized by severe signs and symptoms, similar to constrictive pericarditis and severe heart failure. This serious sequela was evident in cases where no improve- ment after pericardiectomy was observed [67].
1.5.   Prevention   and   Treatment   of   Radiation-Induced
Cardiotoxicity. Cellular oxidative stress leads to the release of toxic  free  radicals  from  endothelial  cells  and vascular smoothmusclecells.Theseactivespeciesinteractwithcellular components, such as proteins, DNA, or lipids, leading to CVD. Therefore, cellular oxidative stress is the main patho- genic factor of CVD [14]. Oxidative stress reﬂects the imbal- ance between the oxidant and the antioxidant mechanism produced by the cells, and so the balance needs to be restored in order to reduce radiation-induced cardiac damage. Antiox- idants are molecules that inhibit oxidative stress chain reac- tions and protect cell components from damage, as shown
in Table 1. They are divided into enzymes and nonenzyme antioxidants. Enzyme antioxidants include SOD, GPX, glu- tathione reductase (GR), and CAT. Nonenzyme antioxidants based on their sources include exogenous and intrinsic anti- oxidants.  GSH  is  an  endogenous  antioxidant;  exogenous antioxidants  include  carotenoids,  ascorbic  acid  (Vit  C), α-tocopherol  (Vit  E),  and  ﬂavonoids  [14].  Antioxidants are the ﬁrst line of defense against ROS damage. They can convert  oxidants  into  less  active  substances  and  prevent lipids, proteins, and DNA in the cells from being damaged by ROS [25].
1.5.1. Vitamin E. The longest known antioxidant in the bio-
logical system is α-tocopherol, which has a relatively high concentration  in  the  cells  and  mitochondrial  membranes [37].  α-Tocopherol is the most  active form  of vitamin E (Vit E) [15]. Various sources of food are believed to contain a large quantity of vitamin E, especially most of the nuts and seeds, such as almonds, peanuts, and sunﬂower seeds [70]. A large number of studies have shown that vitamin E, as a powerful antioxidant, has an important impact on car- diovascular  events.  Vitamin  E  can  regulate  the  oxidative stress  state.  For  example,  α-tocopherol  was  reported  to reduce the production of ROS by reducing the activity of NADPH oxidase, and Vit E interacted with ascorbic acid (Vit C) to terminate the free radical reaction [19]. Vit E is also an anti-inﬂammatory agent and its major anti-inﬂammatory eﬀect   is  through  the   inhibition   of  NF-κB.   The   anti- inﬂammatory eﬀects of α-tocopherol include reducing the synthesis of ICAM-1 and VCAM-1, downregulating scav- enging receptors,  such as  CD  36, reducing the release of IL-1B,  and  inhibiting the  release  of IL-1B  in  monocytes. Therefore, α-tocopherol can inhibit the adhesion of mono- cytes to endothelial cells and reduce their chances of entering the subendothelial space  [19]. In addition, Vit E provides electrons to peroxide  groups, which  are  produced  in the process of lipid peroxidation. Therefore, Vit E can reduce the risk of coronary heart disease [14]. Many studies have identi- ﬁed  the  antioxidant  and  antiatherosclerotic  properties  of vitamin E in animals [71–74]. In 2001, Ferre et al. found that a diet containing vitamin E, palm oil, or sunﬂower oil would reduce the range of pathological changes in the aorta [71]. Some observational studies have also shown that a diet with higher vitamin E content is associated with a lower risk of coronary heart  disease.  In  1993,  Rimm  et  al.  found  that men who took more than 60IU of vitamin E per day had a signiﬁcantly lower risk of coronary heart disease than men who consumed less than 7.5IU per day  [75]. In addition, men who took 100IU vitamin E per day for at least 2 years had a 37% lower risk of coronary heart disease than men who did not take vitamin E, according to an observational study [76].
1.5.2.  Silymarin.  Flavonoids  comprise  a  wide  range  of polyphenolic antioxidants, which can be found in a variety of fruits and vegetables. Silymarin is one of the polyphenolic ﬂavonoids extracted from milk thistle and belongs to none- nzyme antioxidants [77]. Various animal and human studies have  shown  that  silymarin  and  its  active  components (silybin) exhibit strong antioxidant activities by scavenging free radicals, increasing glutathione concentration and SOD activity, and inhibiting lipid peroxidation [78, 79]. Silymarin, as an antioxidant, may prevent radiation-induced CVD in a variety  of ways.  For  example,  it  inhibits  ROS-producing enzymes in mitochondria and reduces the production of free radicals. Silymarin can also upregulate antioxidant enzymes and  downregulate the  activity of NADPH  oxidase  in the myocardium by stimulating the expression of Nrf2. Apart from the  Nrf2  signal pathway,  silymarin  can  also  down- regulate the NF-κB pathway to reduce the production  of proinﬂammatory  cytokines  and  reduce  the  inﬂammatory response that stimulates atherosclerosis [14]. In 1999, Manna et al. showed that silymarin is an eﬀective inhibitor of NF-κB activation  induced  by  a  variety  of inﬂammatory  factors. Silymarin  can  inhibit  NF-κB  activation  by  inhibiting  the phosphorylation and degradation of IKB [79]. Silymarin, also as an herbal antioxidant, is used to prevent CVD, with fewer side eﬀects, and can eliminate ROS and enhance antioxidant enzymes. In addition, Silymarin has a stronger antioxidant eﬀect than vitamin E and other antioxidants [80].
1.5.3. Resveratrol. Resveratrol is found mainly in grapes and
red wine, as well as in plants and fruits, such as peanuts, cran- berries, pistachios, blueberries, and blackberries. It can play a potentially protective role against CVD [81, 82]. Resveratrol is known for its antioxidative and anti-inﬂammatory proper- ties. The mechanism through which resveratrol protects the heart is by increasing the activity of eNOS, which is beneﬁcial to the generation of NO, the expansion of blood vessels, the reduction of platelet aggregation, and the inhibition of ath- erosclerosis [81]. In recent years, these characteristics have been  widely  studied  in  animal  models  and  mannequin models, both in vivo and in vitro. As an antioxidant, resver- atrol can improve the  activity of the  antioxidant  enzyme and can be used as a free radical scavenger. Therefore, it can prevent DNA damage and cell membrane lipid peroxida- tion [82]. However, the direct scavenging eﬀect of resveratrol on ROS is relatively poor, and the antioxidant properties of resveratrol in vivo are more attributed to its role as a redox gene regulator. It does not just reduce the uncoupling of NADPH oxidase and eNOS, but it also upregulates antioxi- dant defense enzymes [83]. Recent clinical trials have shown that resveratrol has low toxicity and good tolerance, and its pharmacological safety is as high as 5g/day [84]. In 2012, Joao et al. found that dietary interventions supplemented with resveratrol signiﬁcantly reduced many cardiac risk fac- tors after 12 months at a low dose (8mg/day) [85].
1.5.4. Lycopene. Many red fruits and vegetables, including tomatoes, watermelons, pink grapefruit, apricots, pink guava, and papaya  contain lycopene  [29].  Lycopene  is the most eﬀective antioxidant among all kinds of common caroten- oids. This carotenoid not only has free radical scavenging activity, but it also helps maintain the balance of the intracel- lular endogenous antioxidant defense system [25]. Lycopene was found to scavenge singlet oxygen, nitrogen dioxide, sul- fur, and sulfonyl free radicals. In the process of singlet oxygen quenching, energy is transferred from singlet oxygen to the lycopene molecule and transformed into a triplet state rich in energy. The capture of other ROS leads to the oxidative decomposition of lycopene molecules. In this way, lycopene prevents the oxidation of lipids, proteins, and DNA in the body [25, 86]. In 2017, Gajowik and Dobrzyńska reported that the eﬀect of adding lycopene one hour before irradiation to protect DNA from oxidative damage was higher than add- ing it immediately before radiation exposure. Moreover, it was found that the addition of lycopene after radiation could not reduce the damage level of DNA. However, lycopene supplementation, especially at low doses, can be used to pro- tect DNA from radiation-induced oxidative damage [86]. A study by Gunasekaran et al. in 2013 also showed that the addition of lycopene can reduce the level of oxidative stress by inhibiting the formation of ROS and the oxidation of glutathione [87]. Lycopene was also found to exhibit an anti- cancer  activity  by  reducing  cell  proliferation  induced  by insulin-like growth factor in various cancer cells [25]. There- fore, lycopene seems to be a promising natural antioxidant candidate for radiation protection and cancer prevention in normal cells [88].
1.5.5. Melatonin. Melatonin is a natural hormone found in
plants, such as cereals, olives, walnuts, tomatoes, pineapples, ginger, and beans. Melatonin has a strong radiation protec- tion eﬀect because of its strong antioxidant ability [63]. Dif- ferent animal studies of melatonin in various physiologic and pharmacologic concentrations and representing a wide range of doses have shown that melatonin has very low tox- icity [89]. Melatonin may have protective eﬀects on the heart through direct free radical scavenging and indirectly through its antioxidant properties [90]. The mechanism of melatonin scavenging free radicals seems to be diﬀerent from most of the  other  antioxidants  because  melatonin  interacts  with ROS  without  stimulating  the  redox  system;  furthermore, melatonin converts free radicals into stable products, which basically do not react with other molecules [26]. In addition, the antioxidant eﬀect of melatonin involves the donation of two electrons, which do not become free radicals after pro- viding electrons to free radicals and neutralizing free radicals to protect cells from free radical attacks. In other words, mel- atonin is diﬀerent from other antioxidants such as vitamin E, because the reaction product of melatonin with free radicals is an antioxidant in itself [91]. The indirect eﬀect of melato- nin  is  to  stimulate  antioxidant  defense,  including  GSH, GPX, SOD, GR, and CAT [92]. Several studies have shown that melatonin can enhance the activity of glutathione perox- idase and increase the synthesis of glutathione [93]. Melato- nin  can  also  inhibit  the  translocation  of NF-κB  into  the nucleus,  thus  inhibiting  the  signal  pathway  mediated  by NF-κB  and  protecting  the  integrity  of  mitochondria  by shielding them from radiation-induced DNA damage, so as to reduce the oxidative stress induced by ROS after radiation [26]. In 2014, Iclal et al. studied the eﬀect of melatonin on the prevention of radiation heart disease in rats by intraperitone- ally injecting 50mg/kg melatonin for 15min before exposure to a single dose of 18Gy. Compared to the untreated group, the histopathological evaluation at 6 months after irradiation showed  that  melatonin  prevented  vasculitis  and  lowered muscle  cell  necrosis  and  ﬁbrosis  [94].  In  2019,  Farhood et al. reported that IL-4 and its downstream genes, IL4ra1, DUOX1, and DUOX2 were activated after rat heart irradia- tion. Melatonin was found to inhibit the increased expression of IL-4, IL4ra1, DUOX1, and DUOX2 before irradiation and may have protective eﬀects on heart injury induced by ioniz- ing radiation by inhibiting the expression of IL-4, DUOX1, and DUOX2 [63].
1.5.6. Hesperidin. Hesperidin is a bioﬂavonoid found in citrus
fruits, such as oranges, lemons, and grapes, as well as in plant extracts, such as tea and olive oil. The pericarp of these plants has the highest concentration of hesperidin. Hesperidin, as a natural antioxidant, has been reported to reduce radiation- induced heart damage [30]. The level of oxidative stress in the  heart  of  mice  fed  with  hesperidin  was  signiﬁcantly decreased, such as the increased expression of antioxidant enzymes,  including  SOD1  and  SOD2,  and  passivation  of NADPH  oxidase.  More  importantly,  hesperidin  plays  an important role in improving cardiac hypertrophy and cardiac remodeling by inhibiting TGF-β1  mRNA  expression  and Smad2/Smad3  phosphorylation  [95].  In  2016,  Rezaeyan et al. found that the level of oxidative damage and inﬂamma- tion were  decreased by  oral  administration  of 100mg/kg hesperidin for 7 days before a single dose of γ-ray irradiation with 18Gy in the chest of rats [96]. Compared with irradiated mice without hesperidin treatment, treatment with hesperi- din  in  mice  for  7  days  after  radiotherapy  signiﬁcantly decreased the level of protein carbonyl groups and improved the levels  of lipid peroxide  and  glutathione  in the heart, which  were  induced  by  radiation  in  a  dose-dependent manner [97]. In addition, it was found that hesperidin could protect the heart of aged rats by mediating the expression of Nrf2, upregulating the activity of antioxidant enzymes and reducing the macromolecular damage induced by oxidative stress [98].
11
2. Limitations and New Research Progress
on Antioxidants
Endogenous antioxidants play a crucial role in maintaining optimal cellular function. However, under oxidative stress conditions, endogenous antioxidants may not be suﬃcient and the addition of dietary antioxidants may be required. Antioxidant  activity depends  on  some  special  conditions, particularly the dose in cells and redox conditions of antiox- idants  [39];  high  doses  of antioxidants  may  alter  redox balance and lead to cellular dysfunction by interacting with ROS at physiological concentration  [99]. In the following article,  we  take vitamin  E,  melatonin,  and  resveratrol  as examples. In terms of biological eﬀects, the most active form of vitamin E is α-tocopherol, which is also the most abundant form in nature and has a strong antioxidant eﬀect. Neverthe- less, recent in vitro studies have shown that vitamin E may promote oxidation at a high dose. A meta-analysis suggests that human adults with chronic diseases who consume more than 400U a day of vitamin E supplements increase all-cause mortality [100]. In addition, melatonin has a strong radiation protection  eﬀect  owing  to  its  strong  antioxidant  ability. However, studies have shown that a high concentration of melatonininducesintracellularROSproductionandaccumu- lation, exhibiting a prooxidant eﬀect that plays an upstream role  in  mitochondria-mediated  apoptosis  and  autophagy. The results indicate that melatonin at high concentration was a potential adjuvant in patients with head and neck squa- mous  cell  carcinoma  who  were  undergoing  radiotherapy [101]. Resveratrol is known for its antioxidant properties, but it has been identiﬁed as a cytotoxic and prooxidant com- pound, depending on its concentration, exposure time, and cell type [102]. Although the dose-dependent oxidative eﬀect of resveratrol leads to oxidative stress of cells treated with 50ml, the lower cytotoxicity found  at  120h of treatment may indicate that the surviving cells seem to be more resistant to  resveratrol-induced  oxidative  damage, which  seems  to weaken with the prolongation of treatment time [103]. To sum up, it is generally accepted that each antioxidant is actu- ally aredox, andtherefore,maybecome aprooxidant, acceler- ating lipid peroxidation and/or inducing DNA damage under speciﬁcconditions.Therefore,itisstronglysuggestedthatthis prooxidanteﬀectmaybeanimportantmechanismintheanti- cancer eﬀect of resveratrol and induction of apoptosis [102].
3. Conclusions
Accumulating  clinical  evidence  suggests  that  exposure  to ionizing radiation increases the risk of CVD. Oxidative stress plays an important role in radiation-induced cardiac toxicity. Oxidative stress is the result of excessive production of ROS and the decrease of ROS scavenging ability. It promotes oxi- dative damage of DNA, which is characterized by cardiac function  damage.  Cancer  survivors who  initially  received radiotherapy are at increased risk of multiple manifestations of CVD. Although modern radiotherapy has adopted cardiac protection techniques that are likely to reduce the prevalence and severity of CV complications, more eﬀorts are needed to prevent and treat these side eﬀects. Therefore, in order to
improve the survival rate and prognosis of cancer patients treated with radiotherapy, the use of natural antioxidants to eliminate  excessive  ROS,  inhibit  the  production  of ROS, and inhibit oxidative stress is a promising strategy for the treatment of radiation-induced heart disease.
Ethical Approval
All procedures performed in studies involving human partic- ipants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
Consent
Informed consent was obtained from all individual partici- pants included in the study.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Authors’Contributions
Cai Xinyong, Yan Peng, Hong Lang, and Shao Liang con- tributed to the  conception of the  study. Zeng Zhiyi, Wu Xiaocheng,  Zhang  Ping,  and  Shao  Liang  contributed  sig- niﬁcantly to manuscript preparation; Zhang Ping and Shao Liang performed the reference search and wrote the manu- script; and Cai Xinyong, Yan Peng, Hong Lang, and Shao Liang helped perform the analysis with constructive discus- sions. Zhang Ping, Yang Peng, and Hong Lang contributed equally to this work.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 81300115 to Liang Shao) and the Science and Technology for Public Service Project Grants from the Wenzhou Municipal Science and Technol- ogy Bureau (Grant No. Y20150191 to Liang Shao and Grant No. Y20150114 to Ping Zhang).
