<title>Investigation of usability of limonite aggregate in heavy-weight concrete production</title>
<author>Yüksel Esen, Zülfü Murat Doğan</author>
<Affiliation>a.Department  of  Civil  Engineering,  Faculty  of  Technology,  Fırat  University,  23119,  Elazığ,  Turkey
b.Tunceli  University,  Tunceli  Vocational  School  Construction  Technology  Program,  Tunceli,  Turkey
</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.01.011</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.01.011</URL>
ABSTRACT
Limonite (Fe2O3·xH2O) is a soft or brown, hard iron mineral, usually in yellow colour. It is also used as a pigment since it contains iron ore. It is believed that it can also be used in the production of heavy concrete due to its 60% iron ore content. In this paper, an experimental study was carried out on radiation shielding properties and certain physical and mechanical properties of normal and limonite reinforced concrete. For this purpose, with the normal concretes prepared according to standards, amounts of aggregates were reduced at the rates of 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% and 100% by volume respectively, and heavy concrete mixes were prepared that were obtained by adding limonite at the same rates in their place. With limonite reinforcement, compressive and ﬂexural strength of the concrete produced decreased, water absorption amount increased and their radiation perme- ability signiﬁcantly decreased.
Keywords:
Limonite
Heavy-weight concrete Radiation shielding Physical properties
1.Introduction
A radiation dose above the maximum permissible limit is very dangerous for human beings (Demir et al., 2007). Unfortunately, nu- clear plants are established in order to fulﬁl the increasing energy need, and we are compulsorily faced with radiation-emitting devices to keep pace with evolving technology. Thus, we need to know the hazards of radiation and take precautions in order to be aﬀected by these eﬀects at a minimum level. Lead or heavy aggregates are generally used in order to be protected from the hazardous eﬀects of radiation. As the negative eﬀects of the lead on human health are also known, protective shields can be created by using elements such as barite, hematite, siderite, li- monite, ilmenit, serpentine containing iron ore, which are generally of a high intensity (Topcu, 2003).
Overall, heavyweight concrete has been used where it is necessary to reduce the thickness of radiation shielding, generally due to space considerations (Demir et al., 2011; Yılmaz et al., 2011; Gencel et al., 2010, 2011; Acevedo and  Serrato,  2010;  Mahdy  et  al.,  2002).  Demir et al. (2011) experimentally found that the linear attenuation coeﬃ- cients (μ) decrease with the increasing photon energy for their con- cretes and the linear attenuation coeﬃcient depends on photoelectric eﬀect and Compton scattering at this energy. He also concluded that barite was eﬀective at 663 keV. Yılmaz et al. (2011) measured the at- tenuation coeﬃcients of gamma rays of 12 concrete samples with and without supplementary cementitious materials, at energies of 59.5 and
661 keV. According to Lee et al. (2007) the aggregate of concrete plays an essential role in modifying physical-mechanical properties of con- crete; it also signiﬁcantly aﬀects shielding properties of concrete (Aïtcin, 2004; Aitcin, 2003; Bakhsh, 2001; Esen and Yilmazer, 2010; Kilincarslan et al., 2006). Esen and Yilmazer (2010) conducted physical and mechanical experiments on concrete samples they produced with barite aggregate. An increase in the values of unit weight, modulus of elasticity, ultrasound pulse velocity (UV) and thermal conductivity was determined depending on the increase in the rate of barite; and a de- crease was determined in the values of Schmidt hardness (SH), water absorption (%), compressive strength and tensile strength. In general, a number of theoretical and experimental studies have been conducted on heavy concretes (Demir et al., 2010; Akkurt et al., 2006; Bashter et al., 1996b, 1997; Bashter, 1997; Mollah  et  al.,  1992; Kaplan, 1989; Kan et al., 2004; Un and Demir, 2013; Maslehuddin et al., 2013; González-Ortega et al., 2014; Singh et al., 2014; El-Sarraf et al., 2013; Dahiru, 2008; Abo-El-Enein et al., 2014; Field et al., 2015; Ouda, 2014). In addition, the shielding properties were measured for diﬀerent types of concrete (Bashter et al., 1996a; Dealmeid et al., 1974; Fillmore, 2004; Rockwell, 1956; Schaeﬀer, 1973; Etherington, 1958; ACI 359-07,
2007; Esen and Yilmazer, 2011; Kansouh, 2012; Akkurt et al., 2011;  Kaur et al., 2012; Basyigit et al., 2011; Ramadan et al., 2006;  Abdo,  2002; Abdo and Megahid, 2001). Barite was mostly used in the studies carried out. Among these studies, Esen and Yilmazer (2011) examined the X-ray and radioisotope energy absorption capability of the heavy
concrete produced using barite, and observed that the density and the capability to absorb the energy of the concrete with an increasing rate of barite increase. Kansouh (2012) produced and examined a new serpentine concrete as a reactor biological shield. According to him,
Ilmenite–limonite concrete is a better reactor biological shield. New serpentine concrete is a better reactor fast neutrons shield than ordinary and hematite–serpentine concretes. Serpentine concrete has lower properties as a reactor total gamma rays shields. Also, the radiation shielding properties of high strength concrete were investigated (Mesbahi et al., 2011; Al-Humaiqani et al., 2013; Chakraborty et al., 2001; Ferraris, 1999; Mostoﬁnejad et al., 2012; Aïtcin and  Neville,  1993; Shah and Ahmad, 2003). Al-Humaiqani et al. (2013), carried out an experimental study on the gamma ray radiation shielding properties of  normal and  heavy high performance  concretes (HPCs).  In this  re-
search, it was observed that the compressive strength of heavy HPCs
plays an important role in enhancing the attenuation of gamma rays.
The compressive strength and attenuation of gamma rays in heavy weight HPCs have a near to linear relation.
Limonite mineral, which is heavily extracted in Turkey especially in
Malatya Hekimhan region, can be used in the production of heavy concrete as it contains a high rate of iron ore. Many studies were carried out on heavy weight concrete in the literature and it was mentioned
that limonite aggregates can be used in concrete production; however,
no such study collectively examining the mechanical, physical and radioactive properties of the concrete produced using limonite was encountered. For this purpose, results were obtained and examined by putting concrete samples at diﬀerent mixing rates and sizes that were prepared and poured in accordance with the standards through physical and mechanical experiments.
2.Experimental study
The limonite mineral to be used in heavy concrete production was supplied as a rock mass and render graded by crushing. Chemical components of limonite were determined (The chemical analysis ex- periments were carried out at Elazıg Altınova Cement Industry Inc. For this, the samples were ﬁrst passed through the breaker. The product is dried at 105 °C until reaching constant weight. 40 gr sample was milled for 100 s in the Herzog grinder with +7 Spectromelt C20 (grinding aids). In the Persian device, the sample is grinded by inserting the ringto the ring, and the sample is pressed at a certain pressure. The pressed
sample was applied to XRF 9900 Xray device and analysed chemically);
and the chemical analysis results of this mineral were shown in Table 1 and the experimental results of the sieve analysis of the limonite ag- gregate were shown in Table 2.
Local river bed aggregate was used as a normal aggregate. The maximum grain diameter (Dmax) was chosen as 16 mm. According to TS 706 EN 12620 (2009), attention was paid to keep the grading curve between the curves A16 and C16 in order for the cavity of the mixture to be low and compasity to be high. PÇ 42.5(CEM I 42,5 R) type cement, of which physical and chemical properties are shown in Table 3, was used in the study.
Limonite mineral was ﬁrst put through physical experiments, and the dry weight (Wd), saturated dry surface weight (Wssd), underwater weight (Ww), dry speciﬁc weight (δd ), dry surface saturated speciﬁc weight (δssd ), visible speciﬁc gravity (δa ), water absorption percen-  tage (Wa) and porosity (p) of the aggregates were determined. Porosity and water absorption rate was calculated according to TS EN 1936
Table 1
Chemical analysis results of limonite mineral (Dogan, 2012).
Table 2
Sieve analysis results of the limonite aggregate to be used in the experiment (Dogan, 2012).
Table 3
Physical and chemical properties of PÇ 42.5 (CEM I 42,5 R) cement (Dogan, 2012).
Table 4
Physical values of the aggregates (Dogan, 2012).
(2010). Values obtained as a result of the experimental studies are shown in Table 4 below.
Mix ratios were calculated in the light of these data and the water/ cement (W/C) rate was determined as 0.40 as a result of the Slump test conducted on the experiment concreting prepared, the amount of slump being 5–10 cm. Considering that the mix to be made will be heavy concrete, Sikament FFN super plasticizer at a rate of 1.5% of the amount of cement was added into the mix in order to prevent the segregation of heavy aggregates. In all mixes, the dosage of cement was taken as 400 kg/m3. Concrete mix rates prepared are shown in Table 5. The concrete mortar prepared considering the mixing ratios were placed in moulds  prepared  in  the  sizes  of  10 × 10 × 10 cm and 4 × 4 × 16 cm in order to determine their mechanical and physical properties and in plate shaped, oiled moulds 30 × 30 × 2 cm in size in
Table 5
Mix design for 1 m3 limonite-reinforced concrete (Dogan, 2012).
order to measure the radiation permeation. It was put through vibration in a way that there were no gaps and the deposition of heavy aggregates was prevented. Concrete samples removed from the moulds were cured in accordance with TS EN 802 (2009). Three samples were poured for each experiment, and the average values were taken.
Dry unit weights, underwater weights, water saturated weights and water absorption percentages by weight of the samples with a 28-day strength were found ﬁrst. Then, specimens were tested by an ultrasonic measurement device among the non-destructive test methods with Pundit according to ASTM C 597-02 (1998), measurements were made with direct transmission method. For the ultrasonic velocity measuring (UPV), the used transducers are 50 mm in diameter, and have a max- imum resonant frequency of 54 kHz. A thin layer of coupling agent (vaseline) should be applied to the transducer and to the test surface. The speed of an ultrasound wave (V) going through a solid material is related to the elasticity module (E) of the material through which the
ultrasound wave goes, and the density of the material (D), and it is shown as V2 α E/D. Afterward their surface hardness was measured using Schmidt test hammer according to TS EN 13791 and ASTM C 805 standards (TS EN 13791, 2010; ASTMC805, 2008). Lastly, samples with the shape of rectangular prism were put through bending tension test according to TS EN 12393-5 (2002), the loading speed of the device was set to 0.05 kN/s for the bending tension test, while cubic samples were put through pressure test according to TS EN 12390-3 (2003). For the compressive strength test, the 200-ton press with a precision of 100 kg was set as 3 kN/s so as the loading speed does not have a blast eﬀect. Furthermore, plate shaped samples prepared in diﬀerent ratios were sent to Turkey Atomic Energy Agency Çekmece Nuclear Facilities for the radiation permeability test using Dosimeter devices. A ﬁlter was chosen for each type of ray, in line with the density of the ray. This ﬁlter absorbs the highest and lowest energies of the ray emitted from the source outside the average. The remaining energy ﬁrst goes through the ﬁlter and then the sample. The amount of ray passing is read by the detector in front of the sample, and it is seen as a numerical value (V/s)
in the dosimeter device. A photo of the X-ray measurement device is shown in Fig. 1. Within the scope of the experimental studies, the concretes were applied radiation rays with diﬀerent X-ray  sources (117 keV, 164 keV) and Co-60 (1250 keV) ray source.
In this study, the control sample was represented by the letter C, and samples produced using the limonite mineral was represented by the letter L, in a way that their percentage in the mixture would appear next to the letter.
3.Results and discussions
Concrete samples that gained their 28-day strength in lime-satu- rated water at room temperature were weighed using a scale with a precision of 0.1 g after taking out from the cure tank; then their satu- rated dry surface weights were calculated. The same samples were weighed under water where by determining their weights in water, the samples were dried in the drying-oven for 24 h and their dry weights were measured. The results are shown in Table 6. As can be seen in the table, both the dry unit weights (density) and water absorption per- centages and porosity increase proportionally as the limonite ratio in concrete samples increases. This results from the fact that the water absorption percentage of the limonite aggregate is higher. Upon ex- amining the UPV results calculated, it was observed that the spreading speed decreases as the amount of limonite increases. And this shows that the cavity rate of the concrete increases, concrete quality decreases and thus, the concrete strength will decrease as the amount of limonite increases.
Only a rough correlation (R2 = 0.4369) between porosity and ap- parent density was obtained (Fig. 2). Conversely, a good degree of correlation of UPV with porosity was found (R2 = 0.84, Fig. 3). In general, the experimental data indicate that compressive strength and UPV are inversely proportional to the porosity. This is expected, as an increase in empty space results in a reduction in elasticity modulus and strength.
As shown in Fig. 4, there is an inverse ratio between compressive strength and density. The density of the control concrete is higher than the L60 series. However, as the amount of limonite in the mixture in- creases, the density also increases proportionally. On the contrary, as the amount of limonite in the mixture increases, the porosity of the concrete increases. This has caused the concrete to become more hollow and the pressure resistance to decrease (See Fig. 5).
Test results measured using Schmidt Test Hammer are shown in Fig. 6. It is observed that the surface hardness decreases as the rate of limonite increases, at the same time a good correlation has been achieved (R2 = 0.95). This graph supports the UPV measurement re- sults. It is also in parallel with the graph obtained as a result of the compressive strength test of concrete.
The relationship between ﬂexural strength and mixture groups was shown in Fig. 7. As can be seen in the graph a good degree of corre- lation of the ﬂexural strength with  the  mixture  groups  was  found (R2 = 0.96). The ﬂexural strength decreases as the rate of limonite in- creases. This is in parallel with other results. The compressive strength test results are shown in Fig. 8 and a good correlation was found
Fig. 1. X-Ray measurement device (Dogan, 2012).
Table 6
Physical and mechanical experiment results of limonite-reinforced concrete (Dogan, 2012).
Fig. 2. Correlation between porosity  and density.
Fig. 3. Correlation  between UPV and porosity.
(R2 = 0.93). It was observed that the compressive strength of the concrete decreases as the limonite rate entering the mixture increases. This result supports previous UPV, surface hardness measurements and ﬂexural strength measurements. The concrete strengths are not between 60 and 75 MPa shows that this aggregate cannot be used in the pro- duction of heavy concrete.
The results of the  radiation  readings  obtained  are  shown  in Figs. 9–11 in graphs. Accordingly, when the graphs are examined, the radiation impermeability of concrete samples increase proportionately as the limonite ratio added into the concrete increases, both in X rays applied to the samples and in Co-60 radiation. Again, when each rate is examined within themselves, we can see that the radiation transmission decreases as thickness increases.
Linear attenuation coeﬃcient is deﬁned as the ray attenuation ca- pacity of the material for 1 mm thickness, then it can be suggested that a material with high linear attenuation coeﬃcient will have higher
radiation shielding. The linear attenuation coeﬃcients μ was obtained by Lambert's law with Eq. (1) (Ouda, 2014):@1
where x is the sample thickness and N and No are the number of counts recorded in the detector with and without the shielding targets, re- spectively. Plotting each ln (N0/N) versus x would give a straight line and μ was obtained using the value of the slope. Fig. 12 indicates the linear attenuation coeﬃcients of the specimens according to diﬀerent energy levels. Results obtained from the measurements, together with the increase of limonite ratio indicates the increase of the linear at- tenuation coeﬃcient. The higher the linear attenuation  coeﬃcient shows the better the radiation absorptive ability.
An indirect measure of the radiological protection provided by a material is given by the HVL. Such parameter represents the minimum thickness required to produce 50% attenuation of the radiation that is Fig. 4. Correlation between compressive strength and density.
Fig. 6. Surface hardness results of the limonite-reinforced concrete samples.
applied to a wall. This thickness is inversely proportional to the at- tenuation coeﬃcient (μ) and may be calculated according with Eq. (2). The HVL is used as a reference in the design of radiological protection
walls. In this sense, materials with smaller values of HVL should lead to slender walls (González-Ortega et al., 2014):
@2
Fig. 13 presents the variation between HVL and the attenuation
coeﬃcient value for each mix on 117 keV X-rays. The lower the values of HVL, the better are the radiation shielding materials in terms of the thickness requirements. While the HVL value was found 27.72 mm on the control sample, it's found 18.33 mm on the L100 sample. The results
indicated also that, the values  of HVL is inversely  proportional  to the concrete density but not related only density.
Fig. 14 presents the variation between HVL and the linear at- tenuation coeﬃcient value for 164 keV X-rays. While the HVL value
Fig. 7. Correlation between ﬂexural strength and limonite ratio in concrete.
Fig. 8. Correlation between compressive strength and limonite ratio in concrete.
Fig. 9. X-ray 150 kV (117 keV) measurement results of the concretes.
was found 33 mm on the control sample, it's found 24.4 mm on the L100 sample.
Fig. 15 presents the variation between HVL and the linear at- tenuation coeﬃcient value for Co-60 (1250 keV) X-rays. While the HVL value was found 770 mm on the control sample, it's found 83 mm on the L100 sample.
4.Conclusions
As a result of the experimental study carried out, negative results were obtained in certain physical and mechanical properties of the concretes obtained by reducing the normal aggregate amount and using limonite aggregate instead. When compared with the control sample, the water absorption amount increased as the limonite amount in the mixture increased. While the water absorption amount of the control sample was 5,6%, this value was measured as 11,51% in 100% limonite
Fig. 10. X-ray 200 kV (164 keV) measurement results of the concretes.
Fig. 11. Co-60 (1250 keV) measurement results of the concretes.
Fig. 12. Linear attenuation  coeﬃcient according to energy.
reinforced concrete. It exhibited an increase of approximately 100%. In UPV measurement results, the speed of spread decreased as the amount of additive increased, and this showed that the concrete gained a cel- lular structure. Decreases were determined in the hardness with the increase in the amount of limonite in surface hardness test. The surface hardness of the concrete reinforced with 100% limonite decreased at a rate of 18% when compared to the control concrete. Signiﬁcant de- creases were observed in the ﬂexural strength when compared to the control sample; while the ﬂexural strength of the control sample was
measured as 6.156 MPa, the ﬂexural strength of L100 concrete was measured as 1846 MPa. Results of compressive strength also support previous results. The compressive strength of L100 concrete decreased at a rate of 65% when compared to the control concrete. While heavy concretes exhibit a strength between 60 and 75 MPa, results obtained in this test remained between 25.15 and 12.1 MPa. It is possible to say that concrete with a low strength as of these mechanical properties.
In  addition,  when  the  shielding  properties  are   examined   (Figs. 9–11), signiﬁcant decreases occurred in radiation transmission Fig. 13. Interaction between the attenuation coeﬃcient for 117 keV X-rays and the HVL.
Fig. 14. Interaction between the attenuation coeﬃcient for 164 keV X-rays and the HVL.
Fig. 15. Interaction between the attenuation coeﬃcient for 1250 keV X-rays and the HVL.
both when the thickness of the concrete undergoing radiation and li- monite addition increased. As can be seen in the graphs, the curve of the control sample (C) remains above, while the curves for the radiation impermeability residue approached the axis below in proportion to the thickness. Although the compressive and tensile strength of the con- cretes produced with limonite aggregate is low, it was observed that radiation impermeability increases as the limonite rate in the mixture increases. It is estimated that this results from the intense iron oxide component in its content. In Radioisotope irradiation (Co-60 1250 keV),
it was observed that the impermeability of limonite-reinforced concrete samples increases with the increase in their thickness. The results were close as these are high-energy rays. The higher the linear attenuation coeﬃcient, the better the ability of radiation absorption. Fig. 12 shows that the best results are obtained in the L100 series. Materials with smaller HVL values cause thin walls. Figs. 13–15 show that signiﬁcant decreases in HVL values were obtained in limonite-added concretes.
Within the scope of these data, it was concluded that Limonite cannot be used in high strength concrete production as a result of
pressure, bending strength, UPV, surface hardness and water absorption results, however in can be used as a radiation shielding material.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from the Scientiﬁc Research Projects Management Council of the Fırat University for this study performed under project with grant no. FUBAP2000.
