<title>Mass attenuation coeﬃcients of X-rays in diﬀerent barite concrete used in radiation protection as shielding against ionizing radiation</title>
<author>T. Airton Almeida Juniora, M.S. Nogueirab,⁎, V. Vivoloc, M.P.A. Potiensc, L.L. Camposc</author>
<Affiliation>a  Brazilian Institute for Safety and Health at Work – FUNDACENTRO, Minas Gerais, Brazil
b  Center of Development of Nuclear Technology – CDTN/CNEN, Minas Gerais, Brazil
c  Institute of Energy and Nuclear Research – IPEN/CNEN, São Paulo, Brazil
</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.02.054</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.02.054</URL>
ABSTRACT
The probability of a photon interacting in a particular way with a given material, per unit path length, is usually called the linear attenuation coeﬃcient (μ), and it is of great importance in radiation shielding. Plates of barite concrete with diﬀerent thickness were fabricated in order to determining their mass attenuation coeﬃcients at diﬀerent energies. The plates were irradiated with ISO X-ray beams (N60, N80, N110 and N150), generated by Pantak HF320 X-ray equipment, at the IPEN laboratory. The mass attenuation coeﬃcients of barite concrete have been measured using X-ray attenuation for diﬀerent thicknesses of barite concrete qualities of the ISO. The attenuator material issued from diﬀerent regions of Brazil. The experimental procedure in this research was validated by comparison between the experimental measurements of mass attenuation coeﬃcients and coeﬃcients determined by the same atomic composition, using as a tool to XCOM. The highest value of (μ/ ρ) found experimentally was in the energy of 48 keV, in ISO 60 N quality, being 1.32( ± 0.49) for purple barite; 1.47( ± 0.41) for white barite and 1.75( ± 0.41) for cream barite. The determination of the chemical composition of the barite samples was of fundamental importance for the characterization of these materials. It can be seen that both calculated and measured data for the linear attenuation coeﬃcients increase with the increasing materials density, as it is expected. It can be concluded that the photon attenuation coeﬃcients depends on the photon energy and the materials density is the main contribution to the photon attenuation coeﬃcients, which is important for radiation shielding.
Keywords:
Barite concrete
Mass attenuation coeﬃcients Radiation shielding
1.Introduction
Concrete which contains water, cement and aggregate, is widely used in building constructions such as medical hospitals. The acknowl- edgement of the characteristics of attenuation of barite is fundamental, from the radioprotection point of view to the viabilisation, the design and the execution of projects of ionizing radiation shielding in radio- active facilities. Planning the appropriate shielding for nuclear centers depends on several factors such as the type of radiation, energy and cost. Mostly high atomic number and high density materials are used for this purpose; but the latter are costly, hence their use is limited. The use of ionizing radiation in medical and dental diagnosis is supervised by the sanitation department in both municipal and state levels, in accordance to rules established by the National Agency of Sanitary Supervision in Brazil - ANVISA. Moreover, The Ministry of Labour and Employment also inspects the workplaces, with the aim to control occupational exposures. For each composite materials of several interests, for X-ray and gamma– photon interactions, is assigned a number (equivalent to atomic number in elements) known as ‘‘eﬀective
atomic number’, as well as X-ray mass attenuation coeﬃcients. [Singh et al. (2010); Nicholas (2010); Morabad and Kerur 2010; MS, 1998).
The walls and doors, in an X-ray equipment room, must have their thickness accurately calculated as to assure protection of the public in general as well as the staﬀ occupationally exposed to ionizing radiation. In practice, the dimensioning of the barite mortar and concrete used in building and plastering walls is determined by the principle of thickness equivalence in relation to concrete or lead. The shielding properties of this material for X-rays are presented in terms of the linear attenuation coeﬃcient µ (cm-1) and it is deﬁned as the probability of a beam interacting with a material per unit path length. An accurate measurement of the linear attenuation coeﬃcient was developed by Kerur et al. (1991). For the authors the best results are obtained for those thicknesses which satisfy 2≤ln (I0/I) ≤4, corre- sponding to transmission (T) range of 0.5≥T≥0.25. Since I0 the incident X-ray beam andIthe transmitted X-ray beam. A plot of the logarithm of transmission as a function of specimen thickness yielded a straight line in each case, indicating the validity of Beer-Lambert's law [Kerur et al. (1991)].X-ray mass attenuation coeﬃcients have a wide range of applica- tions in X-ray science. Many theoretical calculations have been made. However, signiﬁcant discrepancies exist between theory and theory, theory and experiment and experiment and experiment. Large dis- crepancies have been seen between the measurements and the theories of XCOM (Berger, 1999), in the region between the K-edge and up to about 2.5 keV above the edge. [Nicholas (2010)].
Several authors have studied (Shirmardi et al. (2013); Stankovic et al. (2010); Polat and Orhan, 2010) shielding properties of various barites concretes for gamma energies 0.662, 1.173, and 1.332 MeV using the MC code and compared to predictions from the XCOM code and experimental data.
Our study was conducted to evaluate the eﬃcacy of diﬀerent mixtures of barite concrete for shielding in diagnostic X-ray rooms.
2.Material and methods
This study aims at characterizing samples of purple, white and cream barite occurring in diﬀerent parts of Brazil, which are used in radioprotection such as X-ray shielding materials. The analyses were performed at the laboratories of the Center of Development of Nuclear Technology (CDTN/CNEN). Their chemical compositions were deter-
mined by X-ray Fluorescence (EDX). The experimental procedure employed in this research to determine the mass attenuation coeﬃcient (µ/ρ) was the use of ISO N (ISO, 1996) X-ray qualities, (N60, N80, N110 and N150), generated by Pantak HF320 X-ray equipment, at the IPEN/CNEN laboratory (Table 1). The beam of photons transmitted went through another collimator and reached an X-ray detector - type CdTe. This detector was calibrated for sources of 241Am, 133Ba, 109Ca, for photon energies emitted according to Table 2. The measurements of attenuation of the X-ray beams were obtained in good geometry conditions, with a narrow beam, aiming at reducing the quantity of scattered radiation reaching the detector (Almeida et al., 2016; Almeida. et al. 2015). Tungsten collimators ranging from 25 to 2000 µm in diameter and thickness between 1 and 2 mm were used. The collimators were used by the detector, in order to reduce the radiation intensity at the detector, avoiding stacking pulses.
The measurements of the spectra were checked with the detector placed at 340 cm from the focal point, and the barite mortar plates or a set of them were positioned at 50 cm from the focal point. Reference X- ray qualities were used as recommended by ISO (ISO, 1996). By integrating the incident spectrum and the transmitted spectrum over selected width of the photo peak, incident intensity I0 and transmitted intensity I were obtained. Finally the μ/ρ was obtained from the slope of the straight line ﬁtted by plotting a graph of ln I as a function of thickness; method of least squares, following equation:@1
(µ/ρ) was the use of ISO N (ISO, 1996) X-ray qualities, (N60, N80, N110 and N150), generated by Pantak HF320 X-ray equipment, at the IPEN/CNEN laboratory (Table 1). The beam of photons transmitted went through another collimator and reached an X-ray detector - type CdTe. This detector was calibrated for sources of 241Am, 133Ba, 109Ca, for photon energies emitted according to Table 2. The measurements of attenuation of the X-ray beams were obtained in good geometry conditions, with a narrow beam, aiming at reducing the quantity of scattered radiation reaching the detector (Almeida et al., 2016; Almeida. et al. 2015). Tungsten collimators ranging from 25 to 2000 µm in diameter and thickness between 1 and 2 mm were used. The collimators were used by the detector, in order to reduce the radiation intensity at the detector, avoiding stacking pulses.
The measurements of the spectra were checked with the detector placed at 340 cm from the focal point, and the barite mortar plates or a set of them were positioned at 50 cm from the focal point. Reference X- ray qualities were used as recommended by ISO (ISO, 1996). By integrating the incident spectrum and the transmitted spectrum over selected width of the photo peak, incident intensity I0 and transmitted intensity I were obtained. Finally the μ/ρ was obtained from the slope of the straight line ﬁtted by plotting a graph of ln I as a function of thickness; method of least squares, following equation:
Table 1
ISO X-ray reference radiation (Narrow spectrum).
comparison between the experimental measurements of mass attenua- tion coeﬃcients and coeﬃcients determined by the same atomic composition, using XCOM (Berger et al., 1998; Saloman et al., 1988) and FFAST (Chantler, 2000, 1995).
(μ/ρ) is mass attenuation coeﬃcient for materials composed of various elements; one may assume that the contribution of each element to the total interaction of the photon is additive “Mixture Rule”. In accordance to this rule, the total mass attenuation coeﬃcient of a compound is the sum of the weight proportion of each individual atom present in it (Morabad and Kerur, 2010). Therefore:
@2
In which: (μ/ρ)comp is the mass attenuation coeﬃcient for the compound, (μ/ρ)i is the mass attenuation coeﬃcient for each individual element and wi is the fractionated weight of the elements in the compound.
The procedure adopted for the determination of the mass attenua- tion coeﬃcient (μ/ρ) was described by Kerur et al. (2009); Morabad and Kerur (2010), Zenóbio et al. (2011) and Teerthe and Kerur (2016). The range of transmission chosen for linear regression and the determination of μ/ρ should be such that Beer–Lambert's law is rigorously valid. For a solid state detector, Creagh and Hubbel (1987) suggested the transmission range to bee 0.02 < T < 0.13, for proportional counter. Kerur et al. (1991) recommended the transmis- sion range to be 0.25 < T < 0.5 and for the NaI(Tl) detector to be 0.02 < T < 0.5. So it would be of interest to ﬁnd out the range of transmission for the CdTe detector in which Beer–Lambert's law is rigorously valid. We plot the logarithm of transmission as a function of thickness for the range of transmission between 8% and 70% (Fig. 2, in results). With these standardized experimental parameters we, then determine μ/ρ for the remaining materials. The solid line in each ﬁgure is the least squares straight line ﬁt.
Fig. 1. Chemical elements found in the samples of this study. Analyzed by X-ray
ﬂuorescence.
Fig. 2. Graph ln (I0/I) versus thickness for transmission barites white, cream and purple. Irradiated with ISO X-ray beams, energy from 83 keV and with attenuation of 8–70%.
The maximum errors in the mass attenuation coeﬃcients were calculated from errors in incident (I0) and transmitted (I) intensities and areal density (t) as well as statistical counting (Ozdemir et al.,
@3
3.Results and discussion
Plates of barite concrete having diﬀerent thicknesses were fabri- cated in order to determine their mass attenuation coeﬃcients at diﬀerent energies. The attenuator material is used from diﬀerent regions of Brazil, as follows: white barite mortar from the State of Paraiba, Brazil; cream barite mortar from the State of São Paulo, Brazil and purple barite mortar from the State of Bahia, Brazil. Observing that, from the materials studied in this research, the barite mortar of the State of Bahia presents the greatest diﬃculty in the extraction process. The determination of the chemical composition of the barite samples was of fundamental importance for the characterization of these materials. As a very reproducible, fast and accurate instrumental technique, X-ray ﬂuorescence (EDX) is the most usual method for determining the chemical composition of materials (Barba et al., 1997). Among the barite samples studied, white barite, because it presents a higher percentage of barium, is the best raw material for the study of the feasibility of the manufacture of protective barriers, with shielding properties against X radiation. For a better comparison and visualiza- tion, these results are presented in Fig. 1.
From the fraction of the intensity transmitted, the incident air kerma was calculated for each thickness of the materials. The experi- mental (µ/ρ) values for the three materials were calculated using the measured values of I0 and I and Beer-Lambert's law (µ/ρ = lnT/t). The respective inclination of the line is (µ/ρ), which expresses the neperian logarithm (ln) of the intensity transmitted against the thickness of the barite mortar. The attenuation coeﬃcient µ/ρ was then calculated using the least squares ﬁt method (Fig. 2) and the results are given in Tables 3–5.
Table 3
Experimental values of µ/ρ in cm2/g obtained at diﬀerent transmission (T) regions using least squares ﬁt methods. White barite (ρ = 3.10 g/cm3).
Table 4
Experimental values of µ/ρ in cm2/g obtained at different transmission (T) regions using least squares fit methods. Purple barite (ρ = 2.96 g/cm3).
Table 5
Experimental values of µ/ρ in cm2/g obtained at diﬀerent transmission (T) regions using least squares ﬁt methods. Cream barite (ρ = 2.99 g/cm3).
Fig. 3. Distribution of mass attenuation coeﬃcient as a function of eﬀective energy for mortar barite by Win XCOM programmer (Berger et al. (1998) and FFAST (Chantler, 2000, 1995).
Fig. 5. Attenuation coeﬃcients µ/ρ in cm2/g, obtained for four qualities ISO for barites cream purple and white.
Table 6
Experimental values of µ/ρ in cm2/g determined for thicknesses of Barite cream absorber
Acknowledgment
The authors are thankful to FUNDACENTRO-MG, IPEN, CDTN/ CNEN. This work was supported by FAPEMIG, CNPq – Sem Fronteiras and Ministry of Science and Technology – MCT/Brazil, through the Brazilian Institute of Science and Technology (INCT) for Radiation Metrology in Medicine.