<title>A radiation avoiding algorithm of path optimization for radiation protection of workers and robots</title>
<author>Ke Tan a,⇑, Mengkun Li b,⇑, Haixia Gu a, Ming Yang b</author>
<Affiliation>a State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology and Equipment, Shenzhen, Guangdong 581712, China
b School of Electric Power, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510640, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2019.106968 </DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2019.106968 </URL>
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we propose a radiation avoiding algorithm of path optimization, aiming to provide a new technical support for radiation protection to professional personnel and robots engage in radiation works in limited and unknown environment. Based on Beetle Antennae Search (BAS) algorithm, radiation per- ceiving motion model and BAS-based radiation-avoiding algorithm are designed. In view of shortcomings of BAS for radiation avoiding, an improved radiation perceiving motion model and a local perceiving and target-attractive radiation avoiding path optimization algorithm are designed. The proposed algorithms have high computational efficiency and simple process. Besides, a graphical simulation program of the proposed algorithm is established. Comparison results of computer simulation prove effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed algorithms. Experimental results obtained in a simulated environment show that the proposed algorithm could be useful to meet the challenges of radiation avoiding applications that can be described as optimization problems.
Keywords: Radiation avoiding Radiation safety Path planning Nuclear safety Simulation
1.Introduction
The Fukushima accident reminded the world of the importance of nuclear safety, especially radiation risk has always been a highly topical issue of great public interest. High radiation not only harms human, but also disable robots engage in radioactive works. Whether nuclear facilities are commissioned, decommissioned or emergency, exposure to radiation is a potential hazard, complete radiation protection measures  for workers and robots engaging  in radiation works are necessary. During the preparation work, path optimization is one of radiation protection measures for avoid high radiation exposure for workers and robots.
In recent years, there are numerous methods and technologies developed for path planning in radiation environment, for exam- ple, virtual simulations, optimization algorithms and sensor systems.
In virtual simulation, different path schemes can be simulated and evaluated in virtual scene. The Fugen Nuclear Power Station (NPS) in Japan was shut down permanently, Japanese developed Decommissioning Engineering Support System (DEXUS)  which has used to visualize radiation and evaluate the dose that personal suffered to optimize walking route and decommissioning plan (Johnsen et al., 2004). Mól et al. used a game engine for virtual real- ity simulations in emergency situations to collect dose rate data from radiation monitors installed in real plant, then assess dose for personnel (Mól et al., 2008, 2009). Further, Mól et al. used neu- ral networks and virtual reality techniques for assessment of radi- ation dose exposition by nuclear plant’s personnel, to optimize working tasks for minimizing received dose (Mól et al., 2011).
In sensor systems, the sensors provide global and local radiation data for path planning. For example, Hage designed evolutionary software techniques based on sensor in radiation environments and achieved the target which mobile vehicles avoid continued radiation exposure (Hage and Couture, 1999). Khasawneh et al. put forward a localized navigation algorithm based on wireless sensor network which is capable of monitoring and guiding work- ers as radiation events happen, the algorithm was tested success- fully under the ‘‘Radiation Evasion” criterion and the ‘‘Nearest Exit” criterion (Khasawneh et al., 2013a,b).
In optimization algorithms, path problem in radiation protec- tion is converted into mathematical problem. For example, Pachter introduced a weighted exposure and path length optimization problem and a variational approach in point source radiation field (Pachter and Pachter, 2001). Liu et al. addressed a path-planning problem in radioactive environment based on particle swarm opti- mization algorithm, which is combined with multi-objective deci- sion method (Liu et al., 2014). Liu et al. proposed a minimum dosemethod based on staff walking road network model for the walking-path planning in nuclear  facilities (Liu et al.,  2015).  Liu et al. designed walking path-planning method for multiple radia- tion areas to solve minimum dose path problem  in  single  area and find minimum dose path in the whole space  (Liu  et  al.,  2016). Li et al. designed a dynamic minimum dose walking path- searching  method  and  built  a  platform  for  path-planning  (Li   et al., 2016). Wang and Cai proposed a chaos particle swarm opti- mization algorithm for path-planning in radioactive environment of nuclear facilities (Wang and Cai, 2018). Zou et al. (2018) pro- posed a novel heuristic path-finding method for the evaluation of   a vulnerable intrusion path in Physical Protection System (PPS).
The above path planning algorithms need road network model and global radiation data based on nuclear facilities environment. The sensor network in the scene can obtain global radiation data  to guide the motion of worker and robot. But sometimes the global radiation data cannot be obtained from the nuclear facilities scene, the above methods are disabled, so this paper proposed a radiation avoiding algorithm of path optimization to guide workers and robots to avoid high radiation exposure using the local radiation data from sensors which are fixed on the  individual, instead  of  the environment.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents an overview of beetle antennae search algorithm, path evaluation model and radiation point source model. Section 3 presents radia- tion perceiving motion model and BAS-based radiation avoiding algorithm. Section 4 presents a local perceiving and target- attractive radiation avoiding path optimization algorithm. Section 5 describes some simulation-based experimental results. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2.Related works
The paper’s purpose is to design a radiation avoiding algorithm of path optimization, so path evaluation and optimization algo- rithm are essential research works. Because of the simulation restrictions, the data from sensor on the bodies of worker and robot is replaced with calculational results of radiation point source model. Beetle Antennae Search algorithm (BAS) do not need the specific form of the function or gradient information to achieve efficient optimization, and its efficiency is much higher than intel- ligent optimization algorithm. Beetle Antennae Search algorithm is widely combined with other intelligent algorithms in other fields, with very good effect. Beetle using local data in BSA is like the indi- vidual in the research, instead of the particle in PSO (Particle Swarm Optimization) and ant in ACO (Ant Colony Optimization) using global data. Therefore, Beetle Antennae Search algorithm is selected to solve the radiation avoiding path optimization problem.
2.1.Problem description
The individuals of this research paper are workers and robots, the main objects of this research are paths of the individuals. Cur- rently, the main researches focus on global path optimization problem of radiation protection. In this paper, we divide the path optimization problem into 2 parts: local and global optimization problems, as shown in Fig. 1. In local optimization problem, the individual can perceive the radiation field around (visible area), not perceive the other radiation field (invisible area). In global opti- mization problem, both data field and environment structure are known to provide data support for global optimization. According to above mentioned optimization algorithm, data fields of dose dis- tribution are mainly obtained by point kernel method and environ- ment structure is known. So, the key of this research lies in the design of radiation avoiding algorithm using local radiation data
around the individual. In addition, it should be stressed that radi- ation avoiding algorithm is our main research, instead of obstacle avoiding, so obstacle avoiding is not discussed in this paper.
2.2.Beetle antennae search
Beetle Antennae Search is an algorithm inspired by foraging principle of beetles (Jiang and Li, 2017). The biomimetic mecha- nism of BAS can be described as follows: a beetle has two long antennas to foraging for food according to the  smell of  food.  If  the left  antennas feel the  smell stronger  than the  right, then fly  to the right. According to this simple principle, beetle can find food effectively. The smell is equivalent to a function in code, so it can be optimized efficiently according to behavior of beetle.
The pseudo code of BAS algorithm is presented in Fig. 2. The BAS algorithm only has 4 steps: (1) generate a random heading direc- tion of the individual; (2) determine left and right antennae coor- dinates according to the geometry of the individual; (3) calculate the smell strength (function values) received by left and right antennas; (4) determine the next position according to the current position and the movement. Repeat the above steps until the requirement of the end is met.
2.3.Radiation point source model
To simulate the process of radiation perceiving of sensor on the body of worker and robot, we use a radiation point source model to establish the radiation environment. The geometrical types of radi- ation source can be divided into point source and non-point source. Dose calculation of point source is the basis of non-point source, non-point source can be simulated by multiple simple point sources, so we used radiation point source model to establish the hypothetic radiation environment.
Activity is a measure used to characterize the total number of radioactive nuclides in a substance, defined as: the number of radioactive nuclides decaying per unit time.
A	dN dt
The activity of a point source is A (Bq), air-absorbed dose rate at a position away from the point source is calculated as the following equation,
Da ¼ ACk=r2
where r is the distance from the point source, Ck is air kerma rate constant.
Fig. 1. Illustration of local and global optimization problems for workers and robots.
Fig. 2. The pseudo code of BAS algorithm.
Fig. 3. Path evaluation example.
3.BAS-based radiation avoiding algorithm (BARA)
To perceive the radiation intensity around an individual, a motion model of radiation perception is designed based on beetle. Instead of sensor, radiation perceiving calculator for radiation intensity is designed. To effectively avoid high radiation exposure, BAS-based radiation avoiding algorithm is proposed.
3.1.Radiation perceiving motion model (RPM)
The motion model is a simplified and improved individual, as shown in Fig. 4. The beetle has antennae, has immediate percep- tion of signal. The beetle in BAS is simplified as a big cycle, the antennae is simplified as a small cycle. The radiation perceiving motion model is composed of several basic geometries, an inverted equilateral triangle represents the body of the individual, and two red vertices of the triangle represent the antennas (sensors on the body of robot and worker), the center of the triangle is the position of the individual. The blue arrow line between the target and the individual center is the target-attractive direction, the target- attractive line is always perpendicular to the line between two antennas, and make the individual always face the target directly. The antennas respectively perceive the radiation intensity of the left-front and the right-front of the individual. The radiation values of the antennas provide data support for radiation avoiding.
Fig. 5 illustrates the target-attractive strategy. Different from random direction of the individual in BAS, RPM always faces to the target. The target-attractive strategy and the move direction choice strategy are combined to make the individual moving towards the target.
Fig. 6 illustrates the direction choice strategy. Compare the per- ceived values of two antennas of the individual, the direction of next step is determined to towards left and right directions. The rotational radian towards the left and the right is random, not cer- tain. For example, when left radiation value > right radiation value, the individual moves towards the right at an random angle; when left radiation value < right radiation value, the individual moves towards the left at an random angle, and then the individual moves to the next position at a fixed step.
3.2.Radiation perceiving calculator
In this paper, the process of radiation perceiving from the sen- sor on the individual is simulated by numerical calculation. A radi- ation perceiving calculator is designed for simulating the radiation perceiving, instead of the sensors.
Fig. 4. Design of radiation perceiving motion model. The left is a longicorn insect. The center is a simplified BAS model which is composed of three circles. The right is the improved radiation perceiving motion model.
Fig. 5. Illustration of target-attractive individual model.
Radiation perceiving calculator provides two methods: interpo- lation and radiation point source model, as shown in Fig. 7. When the radiation field is known, the radiation values of the antennas are calculated by interpolation method. When the radiative source is known, the radiation values of the antennas are calculated by radiation point source model. If the radiation source is complex and the radiation shield exists, the radiation field can be calculated by MCNP and point kernel method, and then the radiation values of the antennas are calculated by the interpolation method.
The interpolation formula for radiation value is as follows:@
where di is radiation value at i-th point, ri is distance between i-th
point and an antenna.
The point model for radiation value of an antenna is as follows:@
where Ai is activity of i-th source, ri is the distance between an antenna and i-th radiation source, Cki is air kerma rate constant of i-th source.
3.3.Flow of BARA algorithm
BARA keeps the move direction update strategy of the BAS algo- rithm to help the individual search the low radiation exposure path from the origin to the target. Fig. 8 presents the flow of BARA algo- rithm. Different from the unknown target in the BAS, the target in the BARA is known. The algorithm contains two stages: initial stage and cycle stage. In initial stage, initialize origin and target coordi- nates, place the individual in the origin and set the heading direc- tion. In cycle stage, update the movement of the individual according to radiation perceiving, until the individual arrives  at the target.
Fig. 9 presents an example of BARA algorithm for a radiation source. In the example, the individual always faces to the target which attracts the individual to close to the target. At position 1, left value > right value, the individual turns right. At position 2, left value > right value, the individual turns right. At position 3, left value = right value, the individual moves straightly to the target. When the distance between the individual and the target is less than the predefined threshold, the target is reached. BARA algo- rithm drives the individual away from high radiation intensity,towards the target. There are only three relationships between left value and right value, namely equal to, less than, or greater than  the other, so the individual only has three choices of move direc-tion and other situations are not found.
Fig. 10 presents an example of BARA algorithm for two radiation sources. In the example, the individual always faces to the target which attracts the individual to close to it.  At  position  1,  left value < right value, the individual turns left. At position 2, left
Fig. 6. Illustration of the direction choice strategy.
Fig. 7. Illustration of radiation perceiving calculator. A: the radiation value of antenna is calculated by interpolation method. B: the radiation value is calculated by radiation point source model.
value < right value, the individual turns left. At position 3, left value > right value, the individual turns right. At position 4, the individual moves straightly to the target.
4.Local perceiving and target-attractive radiation avoiding algorithm (LTRA)
RPM has two antennas for perceiving radiation intensity, so BARA has greater randomness for move direction of next step. To solve great randomness problem, radiation-perceiving motion model is improved, a local perceiving and target-attractive radia- tion avoiding algorithm is proposed.
4.1.Improved radiation perceiving motion model (IRPM)
Fig. 11 presents the improvement of radiation perceiving motion model. Seven radiation perceiving points are distributed on the semicircular boundary about the individual with a radius   of the distance between perceiving point and the individual. The
Radiation perceiving points get the radiation value distribution in front of the individual, the place closes to minimum radiation value can be found from the distribution, the move direction is from the current position to the next position, instead of the ran- dom direction of  motion. For  avoiding  abrupt direction changing,
we introduce an optional direction weight vd     0; 1 , which  limits
the direction of motion. The direction of motion to the next step is determined by the following formula.
new direction ¼ vd m directions ðiÞ
where i is the index of the perceiving point, directions is the radian set of the perceiving points.
(3) Variable step
When the move direction is determined, the individual moves  at a step. If the step is fixed and the turning angle is large, the opti- mized path shakes. So, a variable step strategy is designed, the new step is calculated by the following formula.:
radian difference between two adjacent perceiving points is a fixed value p /6. Relative to the individual, the radian set of the seven points      is      expressed      as      directions ¼ ½p=2; p=3; p=6; 0; —p=6;
step ¼
0	p
2
0:1;	others
p=3; p=2 . Because of simulation restrictions, radiation values
of perceiving points are calculated by radiation perceiving calcula- tor, instead of sensor.
RPM has two left-front and right-front antennas for perceiving radiation intensity, the data is little for  making direction choice for next step. IRPM’ radiation perceiving points almost cover all the probable move direction, the perceived data are enough to determine better move direction of the next step.
4.2.Flow of LTRA algorithm
A local perceiving and target-attractive radiation avoiding algo- rithm is proposed based on the BARA, the improvement flow is shown in Fig. 12. There are four main improvements in the algorithm.
(1)Seven fixed radiation perceiving  points
According to IRPM, seven radiation perceiving points are fixed in front of the individual body. When the individual moves, the points will perceive the radiation intensity in the front.
(2)Variable optional direction
Dh ¼ new direction — new direction0
where Dh is the radian difference of two move directions when the individual is at current position and next position, step0  is the previ- ous step.
The step is in a linear decrease with the moving of the individ- ual, till 0.1 m. When the radian difference Dh is more than p/2, the step also is set as 0.1 m. In the initial stage, the variable step is a value between 0 and 1.
(4) Variable size (length of antennae)
The size of the individual has obviously positive correlation with length of antennae. The large size means that radiation per- ceiving position is far away the individual. We designed a variable size which is in a linear decrease with the moving of the individual, till 0.1 times of the size. The length of antennae is determined by the following formula.
length         vl m length0;    length > 0:1
0:1;	others
where vl is a weight in the range of [0.1,1],length0  is the length of the antennae at the previous position.
Fig. 8. Flow of BARA algorithm.
From what has been mentioned above, we introduce 3 parame- ters into the LTRA algorithm, such as optional direction weight vd, step and a length weight vl. These parameters should be assigned
at the initialization of the LTRA algorithm. The effects and the func- tions of these parameters to the algorithm are discussed in the fol- lowing simulation.
Fig. 13 presents an example of LTRA algorithm for two radiation sources. When left value > right value, the individual turns right. When left value < right value, the individual turns left. The size
Fig. 9. Illustration of radiation avoiding for a radiation source. The green star is the target, the red circle is the radiation source, the orange triangles are the individuals at different times,  the blue  lines  are the  target-attractive functions (head directions), the comparison results of radiation values of two antennas are shown onto the individuals. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 10. Illustration of radiation avoiding for two radiation sources. The green star is the target, the red circle is the radiation source, the orange triangles are individuals at different times,  the blue  lines  are the  target-attractive functions (head directions), the comparison results of radiation values  of  two  antennas  are  onto the individuals. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 11. Illustration of perceiving ranges of two radiation perceiving models.
Fig. 12. Improvement flow of radiation avoiding algorithm.
of the individual decreases with the movement of it. The radian off- set of direction of motion of the individual at position 4 and posi- tion 5 is more than pi=2, so at position 5, the size becomes smaller and the step becomes shorter than the individual at other positions The path consists of line segments which is a series of discrete coordinate points connected. The output results of path optimiza- tion algorithm are a series of discrete points. According to the the- ory and features of LTRA, the path maybe rugged and nonsmoothed. So, smoothing processing technology is used for proximately fitting the discrete points to solve the nonsmoothed
problems of the optimized path.
5.Simulation test and results
The proposed algorithms BARA and LTRA were realized by Visual Studio 2013 software. The simulations were performed to verify the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, three simula- tion tests with different numbers of radiation sources were fin- ished on computer of 2 Core CPU, 4 Gb RAM and Window 7.
Fig. 13. Illustration of LTRA algorithm for two radiation sources.
In test 1 and 2, we use four different methods. In the first method, the aim is to minimize dose using global radiation data, which is the minimum dose path search method based on dijkstra (MDPS) (Liu et al., 2015). In the other methods we avoid high radi- ation exposure while the individual move in a radioactive environ- ment. Table 1 gives these methods’ parameters, which are recommended by summarizing and analyzing from many experi- ment results.
5.1.Test 1- one radiation point source
Assume that a 10 m 10 m square scene has  a  60Co  gamma point  source  located  at   the   center   of   the   scene,   as   shown in Fig. 14(A). The activity is 1 GBq, kinetic energy constant Ck is
Table 1
Algorithms’ parameters.
Table 2
The comparison results of test 1.
370 lSv/(h m GBq). The start point is located at left-up corner, the target point is located at right-bottom corner and right-up corner. Fig. 14(B)–(E) shows four simple paths produced by these four methods. The second picture shows the minimum dose path, the rest of pictures show the radiation avoiding paths. Table 2 show
the performance  of  four methods for test 1.
5.2.Test  2- four radiation point sources
Assume that a 10 m 10 m square scene has four 60Co gamma point sources located at different positions, as shown in Fig. 15. Table 3 shows the information of c radiation sources. The start point is located at left-up corner and the  target  point is  located  at right-bottom corner.
Fig. 15(B)–(E) shows four paths produced by these four meth- ods. The second picture shows the minimum dose path, the rest    of pictures show radiation avoiding paths. Table 4 show the perfor- mance of four methods for test 2.
5.3.Test 3- multiple radiation points
Assume that a 10m 36m rectangular scene has  ten  60Co gamma point sources located at different positions, a minimum
dose path obtained by MDPS is shown in Fig. 16. Fig. 17 shows a path produced by LTRA with 0.5 m initial step length and 0.75 m antennae length, instant dose rate and cumulative dose  curves. Fig. 18 shows a path produced by LTRA with 0.1 m initial step length and 0.15 m antennae length, instant dose rate and cumula- tive dose curves. Fig. 19 compares three paths’ cumulative dose.
5.4.Discussion
This preliminary round of simulations, although limited, allows to draw some interesting insights. According to the results of sim- ulation test 1, 2 and 3, the step and the length of antennae have the very tremendous influence on the performance of the algorithm, smaller sometimes is better for the step and the length.
Observe these trajectories, the design of target-attractive makes the individual reach the target and the design of radiation perceiv- ing function contributes to radiation avoiding. According to elapsed times in test 1 and 2, LTRA and BARA is much faster than MDPS, so we can deduce that data sizes calculated by MDPS are much more than LTRA and BARA, MDPS needs to traverse much more data for determining the next step, LTRA and BARA success-
Fig. 14. The scenario and four paths in test 1. A:the scenario in test1; B:Path1 is the result of minimizing the path’s dose by MDPS; C:Path2 is the result of radiation avoiding by RA1, the subfigure is the local enlarged graph; D:Path3 is the result of radiation avoiding by RA2; E:Path4 is the result of radiation avoiding by RA3;
2.4.Path evaluation model
The active area of an individual is regarded as a 2D scene, the move path of an individual is regarded as a curve in 2D scene. In computer graphics, the move path can be described by many dis- perse points in 2D scene, as shown in Fig. 3.
Path optimization needs evaluation for one or more indicators of the path. The length and radiation value of the walking path   can be evaluated by the following equation.
N
distance  of  walking path ¼	distancei
i¼0
N
dose  of  walking path ¼	dosei
i¼0
where distancei is distance between i-th point and (i + 1)-th point in a path, radaitionvaluei is radiation value of i-th point.Fig. 15. The scenario and four paths in test 2. A:the scenario in test1; B:Path1 is the result of minimizing the path’s dose by MDPS; C:Path2 is the result of radiation avoiding by RA1, the subfigure is the local enlarged graph; D:Path3 is the result of radiation avoiding by RA2, the subfigure is the local enlarged graph; E:Path4 is the result of radiation avoiding by RA3.
Table 3
The information of c radiation source.
Table 4
The comparison results of test 2.
Fig. 16. Minimum dose path from the start to the target obtained by MDPS and radiation point source distribution.
Fig. 17. Radiation avoiding path from the start to the target in the scene is obtained by LTRA with 0.5 m initial step length and 0.75 m antennae length. A: radiation avoiding path and radiation distribution map (warmer colors indicate higher radiation states). B: instant dose rate graph while moving. C: cumulative dose graph while moving.
Fig. 18. Radiation avoiding path from the start to the target in the scene is obtained by LTRA with 0.1 m initial step length and 0.15 m antennae length. A: radiation avoiding path and radiation distribution map (warmer colors indicate higher radiation states). B: instant dose rate graph while moving. C: cumulative dose graph while moving.
fully use much less local radiation data to achieve the goal of radi- ation avoiding. According to paths in test 1 and 2, the path obtained by BARA is much zigzagger than other paths. Radiation avoiding algorithm is effective for avoiding high radiation exposure of the path using local radiation data around the individual. LTRA and BARA are satisfactory for simple and small environment in test
1 and 2, but local optimization’s drawback is observed for big and complex environment in test 3, namely the potential exists that radiation avoiding path leads to greater cumulative dose risk. The reason is that the place far away from the individual is  unknown in LTRA and BARA, but is known in MDPS, it still is problem between global optimization and local optimization.
Fig. 19. Cumulative dose of three paths in test 3.
Radiation avoiding optimization is a local algorithm without enough consideration of the information in global scene, so radia- tion avoiding algorithm can be a complement to minimum dose path optimization algorithm in engineering application. Currently, BAS has been combining beetle foraging mechanism with swarm intelligence for global optimization problem, for example, BSO (Beetle Swarm Optimization) and BSAS (Beetle Swarm Antennae Search). So, we can proceed with connecting radiation avoiding algorithm with more various radiation data and swarm intelli- gence, to expand more potential application field.
6.Conclusion
This paper introduces a local path optimization problem which is different from the global path optimization problem of radiation protection for workers and robots. For the local path optimization problem, a radiation avoiding algorithm of path optimization is proposed. We combine BAS mechanism with radiation dosimetry, and establishes a radiation perceiving motion model with local perceiving and target-attractive functions. In the research process, we improve the motion model and the algorithm to reduce the ran- domness to form LTRA algorithm, apply them to radiation avoiding in an environment with single and multiple point sources. The experimental results show that LTRA algorithm can give very effec- tive results and has real-time running speed. In addition, the LTRA algorithm also exhibits more flexible working conditions when dealing without road network constraints. The research results contribute to expand the theorical system of path planning algo- rithm for workers and robots engaging in radiation works.
This  paper  explores  the  local  radiation  avoiding  problem for
workers and robots, we suggest taking local radiation avoiding as  a strategy to support other global optimization algorithms. For example, the combination of obstacle avoiding and radiation avoiding for robots engaging in radiation works, the combination of global data, swarm intelligent and radiation avoiding for global radiation avoiding, and dose optimization for occupational dose limitation.   Different   purposes   and  demands determine  various
combinations of methods, leads to different results and perfor- mances. In addition, there is also some difference between theori- cal results and practical application, it still should be studied in following works.
