<title>Fire risk assessment to develop a compliance strategy for sample redundant	 electrical panels at a nuclear power plant based on deterministic fire
protection requirements</title>
<author>Jaiho Lee a,*, Francisco Joglar b, Usama Farradj c, Andrew Ratchford c</author>
<Affiliation>a KHNP-CRI, 70 Yuseong-daero 1312 Beon-gil, Daejeon, 34101, South Korea
b Jensen Hughes, Rockville, MD, 20850, USA
c Jensen Hughes, Concord, CA, 94520, USA
</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103467</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103467</URL>
ABSTRACT
In this study, the relative risk contribution to develop a compliance strategy of a nuclear power plant designed to a deterministic fire protection standard was assessed using a focused fire probabilistic risk assessment (PRA). Sample redundant electrical panels were selected for the assessment. We suggested a method to estimate all of the required input information values for developing a resolution strategy on the compliance-related issue without using actual PRA information developed in accordance with Part 4 of the ASME/ANS-RA-Sa-2009 PRA standard. The damage time of target cables due to a fire was calculated to quantitatively assess the risk signif- icance of a fire using fire modeling tools including fire dynamics tools (FDTs) and fire dynamics simulator (FDS)
6.5.2. We found an option to resolve the compliance-related issue that is controlling the access to transient ignition sources near fire area where the electrical panels are located through fire modeling analysis. The relatively conservative fire PRA modeling yielded a calculated fire core damage frequency (CDF) of 6.67 E-08/yr. The risk impact of the fire scenario is small and would likely be considered acceptable under a risk information- based regulatory framework.
Keywords:
Nuclear power plant Risk assessment
Fire modeling
Focused-scope fire PRA Safe shutdown
1.Introduction
In nuclear power plants (NPPs), systems and components related to safe shutdown are designed with redundancy and diversity concepts so that other trains can be used to safely shutdown the reactor even if one train becomes unavailable for some reason. However, if redundant safe shutdown equipment or their associated cables are damaged by fire, the ability to safely shutdown the reactor may be compromised. For this reason, post fire safe shutdown analysis (PFSSA) that evaluates fire impacts on safe shutdown functions is performed. The PFSSA typically consists of four tasks: selection of safe shutdown system and equipment, selection of required cables through circuit analysis, identification of equipment and cable locations, and fire area compliance assessment. In NPPs, the fire area is defined as the portion of a building or plant that is separated from other areas by 3-h or more fire rated barriers (U.S. NRC, 2009b). The objective of the fire area compliance assessment is to assure that the deterministic fire protection requirements are satisfied for a
single fire in any plant fire area.
In earlier versions of a PFSSA, only a single spurious operation of cables was taken into account. Spurious operation is defined in NEI 00–01 as “The possible inadvertent operation or repositioning of a piece of equipment.” However, many studies (Kassawara, 2002; Funk and Davis, 2002) have demonstrated that multiple spurious operations have the potential to occur through different cable failure modes such as hot shorts, short to ground, and open circuits. Based on those studies, the consideration of multiple spurious operation (MSO) analysis was adopted in the existing deterministic fire protection regulatory guide (U.
S. NRC, 2009b) which references a methodology described in NEI 00–01 (NEI, 2009). This methodology was endorsed by US Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). According to NEI 00–01, Appendix H (NEI, 2009), the safe shutdown equipment for the PFSSA is classified into “required for hot shutdown” and “important to safe shutdown” for the purpose of application of different mitigation measures to resolve the issues.
The focused-scope fire probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) is one of
the mitigation strategies to resolve issues for important to safe shutdown components, but it has been only allowed in the US for the nuclear power plants which had adopted performance-based fire protection standard. A focused-scope fire PRA is used to assess the risk significance of any MSOs as a simple means of characterizing the risk significance of identified circuit failure scenarios (NEI, 2009). It has not been formally accepted as a resolution strategy to resolve an MSO issue related to the important to safe shutdown component for NPPs with the deterministic fire protection program. For the NPP with deterministic fire protection program, however, the assessment on the MSO risk contribution asso- ciated with the important to safe shutdown component to core damage frequency (CDF) would be a benefit in improving plant safety as a means for prioritization of MSO issues.
In this study, we assessed the relative risk contribution of a separa- tion issue in a nuclear power plant designed with deterministic fire
protection standard, using the methodology for the assessment of the risk significance of MSO issues. Sample redundant electrical panels were selected for the assessment. We also suggested a method to estimate all of the required input information values including ignition frequency, severity factor, non-suppression probability, conditional core damage probabilities, etc., for a specific separation issue without using actual plant PRA information associated with Part 4 of the ASME/ANS-RA-Sa- 2009 PRA standard (ASME/ANS, 2008). Therefore, this study was using estimates from industry guidance documents, in the absence of a fire PRA, to assess the risk significance of the interaction. The risk contri- bution was performed in terms of the CDF only because NPPs adopting the deterministic fire protection standard do not apply the large early release frequency (LERF) requirements. The time required for a fire to damage the target cables was calculated to assess quantitatively the risk significance of a fire using fire modeling tools, including fire dynamics
Fig. 1. Analysis process of the focused-scope fire PRA for fire protection issue.
tools (FDTs) for hand calculation model (Iqbal and Salley, 2006) and fire dynamics simulator (FDS) version 6.5.2 for computational fluid dy- namics (CFD) model (McGrattan et al., 2016).
2.Methodology
2.1.Focused-scope fire PRA process
A process for applying a focused-scope fire PRA to the sample important to safe shutdown components to resolve MSO issues, using the method specified in NUREG/CR-6850 (U.S. NRC, 2005; 2010) is shown in Fig. 1. During the fire area assessment for post fire safe shutdown analysis, the candidate applicable for the focused-scope fire PRA disposition among the important safe shutdown components (e.g., ca- bles and raceway) needing the compliance strategy should be deter- mined by analysis and expert review. Once the components in the fire area of concern are selected, the location of potential fixed and transient ignition sources in that area should be investigated reviewing design documentation. Then, the analyst needs to select appropriate fire modeling tool(s) to calculate the fire generated conditions that can damage target cables. Specifically, for targets that are damaged by the fire.
The total plant ignition frequency is determined using the guidelines of NUREG-2169 (U.S. NRC, 2015b). The ignition source frequency is determined by predicting the fraction of the plant ignition frequency applicable to the ignition source in the fire area of concern.
The heat release rate (HRR) value necessary for generating target damage will be used to find the severity factor (see Appendix E in NUREG/CR-6850 for a definition of severity factor) term that is applied in the risk equation. Damage is assumed if flames can dam- age a target, either by radiant heat flux or hot gas exposures exceeding the damage threshold criteria assigned to the target.
The analyst should identify the locations, types and availability of automatic suppression and manual suppression systems that can be used to extinguish fire in the fire area before target damage occurs. Based on the system, the time to suppression can be determined. The analyst can then use the NUREG-2169 (U.S. NRC, 2015b) manual non-suppression probability curves for evaluating non suppression probabilities.
The analyst should identify MSO components affected in each fire scenario and determine if circuit failure mode probabilities as defined in NUREG/CR-7150 (U.S. NRC, 2014) can be credited.
Without the benefit of a full at power fire PRA model, the internal events PRA model could be used to estimate a conditional core damage probability (CCDP) for the fire scenario(s) of concern. Using factors calculated above, e.g., ignition frequency, severity factor, and non-suppression probability, the core damage frequency (CDF) of the fire scenario for each evaluated scenario can be determined. The large early release frequency (LERF) contribution evaluation is not considered essential because the NPP designed with a deterministic fire protection standard does not apply the large early release fre- quency (LERF) requirement.
Finally, the analyst should evaluate defense-in-depth and safety margins such as non-credited suppression systems and PRA fault tree model conservatisms that can be used in scenarios.
2.2.Example of resolutions using fire PRA
It was assumed that during a fire area compliance assessment, sam- ple electrical panels were determined as components suitable for focused fire PRA application as they were classified as “important to safe shutdown”. The circulating intake fire area where the electrical panels are located include cables that could impact the electrical panels of two trains as shown in Fig. 2. However, the cables will not be damaged by a fire because they are embedded until they enter their respective local
indication panels A and B. On the other hand, damage of the electrical panels caused by a fire can blow the control power fuses for the control circuit preventing the equipment related to the panels (e.g., traveling screens) from operating. Because traveling screen failure does not directly affect the safe shutdown path, the electrical panels for operating screens are classified as “components important to safe shutdown”. Although this failure mode is not due to a particular type of multiple spurious operation, this compliance-related issue for the separation is a good candidate for applying fire PRA techniques for resolution.
Detailed information of panel configuration and dimensions in sup- port of focused fire PRA evaluation was obtained by walk-downs. The electrical panels in which the cables are routed are 0.61 m (length) x
0.61 m (height) x 0.23 m (width). The resulting volume classifies them as small enclosures according to the guidance in NUREG-2178 (U.S. NRC, 2015a). The ignition source applicable for scenarios at the location of the panels is either an electrical panel or a transient ignition source. No intervening or secondary combustible such as cable trays, combus- tible insulation or plastic pipe was identified during the walk-downs.
2.3.Fire modeling
Fire modeling was performed to support the assessment of the risk contribution for possible fire scenarios in the sample fire area. The fire modeling was conducted with FDS version 6.5.2 in addition to FDT to see if there were any particular insights to be gained and to facilitate a “proof of concept” activity. These tools are widely used in nuclear power plant fire modeling. In this study, the flame radiation model within the FDT suite of equations was determined to be a suitable fire modeling tools for evaluating this scenario. Specifically, the radiant heat flux is calculated using a solid flame model because the targets are closed to the ignition source. The time to target damage was evaluated as the time needed for the heat flux at the location of the target to reach the damage threshold.
As part of this study, the field model FDS was used to evaluate fire conditions at the location of the target. FDS is an advanced fire modeling tool that calculates the Navier-Stokes equations in the form of partial differential equations using the finite volume method. FDS uses a large eddy simulation (LES) turbulent model to calculate the gas flow due to the fire, and an eddy dissipation combustion model to calculate the fuel combustion rate. A computational fluid dynamics model such as FDS is suitable for computing unconfined fire in an open space and can predict the change in radiant heat flux over time in the open fire area.
Fig. 2. Schematic of sample electrical panels for the study (top view).
The ignition source and its peak HRR were selected by reference to NUREG/CR-6850 (U.S. NRC, 2005) and NUREG/CR-2178 (U.S. NRC,
2015a). The ambient temperature was assumed to be 20 ◦C, and the fire
was assumed to occur under still air condition, which is wind free ventilation. All cables were assumed to be thermoplastic cables with temperature damage threshold of 205 ◦C and heat flux damage threshold of 6 kW/m2, because the use of thermoplastic properties is
more conservative compared to thermoset properties.
The peak HRR for the transient ignition source was assumed to be 317 kW, with a t-squared growth profile (U.S. NRC, 2005) as follows:@1
when Q˙ (t) is the HRR (kW) at time t (s), α is the growth rate propor-
tionality constant (kW/s2), and Q˙ p  is the peak HRR (kW).
U.S. NRC (2008) recommends an 8 min growth duration of confined transient fire such as trash can, and a 2 min growth for unconfined transient fires. In this study, the growth duration of 2 min for the tran-
sient fire was adopted to bound potential transient packages. The fire area of transient ignition source was assumed to be 0.37 m2 to apply a fire Froude number of 1 representing a typical value for the types of
materials  associated  with  transient  fire  events  from  Table  E   2  of
NUREG-1934 (U.S. NRC, 2012). The growth rate proportionality con- stant with 2 min growth duration and peak HRR of 317 kW was calcu- lated as 0.022 kW/s2. Fig. 3 depicts the HRR profiles for transient and
fixed ignition sources. It is noted that the transient fire was postulated in between the two electrical panels. The fire duration of transient fires was determined by assuming that there is no decay period (e.g., the fire burns at its peak until it runs out of fuel). The time to consume the transient fuel is calculated by integrating the heat release rate over the time of the burn:@2
when Q (kJ) is the total energy of the transient fire, tg(s) is time when fire growth ends and the peak HRR starts, tp(s) is time when the peak HRR ends and the fuel is consumed, α (kW/s2) is the growth rate pro- portionality constant, and Q˙ p  (kW) is the peak HRR, and. The total heat
content of the transient fire of 202,560 kJ was assumed to be the largest
Fig. 3. HRR profiles with 98th percentile peak HRR for transient fire and small electrical enclosure fire.transient fire source documented in Table G-7 of NUREG/CR-6850 (U.S. NRC, 2005). The peak duration time, tp -tg (s), was calculated 599s by Equation (2).
The HRR profile for the electrical enclosure ignition source was determined using the NUREG/CR-2178 guidance (U.S. NRC, 2015a). A single electrical panel fire is defined with a growth rate, a peak burning stage, and a decay stage as shown in Fig. 3. The peak HRR of the elec- trical panel was assumed to be 45 kW. According to the t-squared curve of NUREG/CR-6850 (U.S. NRC, 2005), the growth rate proportionality
constant of the small electrical enclosure with a duration of 12 min was calculated to be 8.68 × 10—5 kW/s2. The duration of the peak burning stage for electrical panel fire was assumed to be 8 min and the time duration for the decay stage to be 19 min, as specified by NUREG/CR-6850 (U.S. NRC, 2005). Because the decay pattern is not specified in NUREG/CR-6850 (U.S. NRC, 2005), the linear decay was
applied with conservatism based on previous studies (Chavez, 1987; Mangs et al., 2003). The electrical enclosure fire area of 0.3 m2 was used assuming 81% the panel surface area except the periphery would be
burned.
Fig. 4 illustrates the location and dimensions of the electrical panels and transient ignition source assumed for the FDS simulations. All di- mensions of the schematic are expressed as relative distances based on the length L of one side of the square electrical panel surface area and the square transient fire area. The electrical panels were modeled as a cuboid with a square surface area of side length L and a thickness of 0.4
L. In this study, the length L was assumed to be 0.61 m (U.S. NRC, 2016). Since the configuration and position of the electrical panels is sym- metric, simulation for the fixed ignition source was performed assuming the fire occurred only in panel-A. It was assumed that transient fire with square area of side length L between two panels can occur 0.61 m high from the floor and at the floor surface (Calley and Koonce, 2014; U.S.NRC, 2020).
Simulation input variables such as soot yield, CO yield and heat of
combustion for each ignition source were selected from relevant  infor-mation available SFPE handbook for fire protection engineering (Hurley
et al., 2015). The transient ignition source was modeled as polyethylene representing the packing plastic with one-third of the total mass and the cellulose representing the cardboard with two-thirds of the total mass (polyethylene (CH2) has 6% soot yield, 2.4% CO yield, 43.6 MJ/kg, whereas the cellulose (CH2O) has 1% soot yield and 13.2 MJ/kg heat of combustion without CO production from the SFPE handbook (Hurley et al., 2015)). It was assumed that the transient ignition source was composed as an equivalent fuel in forms of CH2O0.48 with a soot yield of 2.7%, a CO of 0.8%, and a heat of combustion of 23.3 MJ/kg. For the electrical panel fire, the fuel was modeled as electrical thermoplastic cables. The cable composition of CH1.8N with soot yield of 12%, CO yield of 10% was assumed from the SFPE handbook (Hurley et al., 2015). The heat of combustion of the cable composition was assumed to be 16 MJ/kg from NUREG/CR-7010 (McGrattan et al., 2012).
The heat flux and temperature conditions were measured numeri- cally at six measurement points (A1~3 near panel-A and B1~3 near Panel-B) to see how the fire from the ignition source affects the target. Since the electrical panels are located in the open space of the wind free ventilation condition, the mesh boundaries were set to be OPEN denoting a passive opening to the outside except for the floor, and a concrete wall with the height of 2.11 m which is 0.32 m horizontally further away from the backside of the two electrical panels. In the FDS simulation, the size of the grid may affect the simulation results. The grid sensitivity analysis was performed for the transient fire of 0.61 m high from the floor, by applying cubic cell sizes of 10 cm, 5 cm, and 2.5 cm as shown in Table 1. The time step used for FDS simulations was 0.01s.
Fig. 4. Schematic of FDS simulation domain (4.4 m × 1 m x 3 m).
Table 1
Fig. 4. Schematic of FDS simulation domain (4.4 m × 1 m x 3 m).
Table 1
Total number of cells for grid sensitivity.
3.Results and discussions
3.1.Fire modeling
3.1.1.FDT calculation
To evaluate the radiant heat flux from each ignition source, the model available in spreadsheet 05.1-heat-flux-calculations-wind-free- sup1-si, included in NUREG-1805 (Iqbal and Salley, 2006) was used. The radiant heat flux from the fire to the target was calculated using point source model and solid flame radiation model under no-wind condition, as shown in Table 2. For transient fire between two elec- trical panels, if the radiant heat flux on the wall of the electrical panel
located closest to the fire exceeds a radiant heat flux damage threshold of  6 kW/m2,  the cables  inside  the electrical  panel  may be damaged.
Considering the separation distance between the electrical panels, the maximum HRR of the transient fire should be less than 39.6 kW to avoid
damaging the electrical panels. Using HRR growth rate proportionality constant of 0.022 kW/s2, the time to damage electrical enclosures was calculated to be 42.4 s. For the transient fire with maximum HRR of 317
kW, a distance of 1.24 m between the fire and a panel should be maintained to avoid damaging the electrical panels. In case of the electrical panel fire, a maximum HRR of 368.9 kW is necessary to generate  a damaging  radiant  heat flux  to the target  electrical   panel.
Table 2
Radiant heat flux predicted using the FDTs for targets.
Accordingly, the maximum HRR of 45 kW, which is the 98th percentile value recommended for screening of small electrical panels does not damage the neighboring electrical panel.
3.1.2.FDS calculation
The 98th percentile HRR profile of transient and small electrical enclosure fire used in the FDT analysis was applied as predefined input for simulations using FDS. Fig. 5 shows HRR profiles of transient and electrical panel ignition sources calculated by the FDS. The HRR varia- tion calculated by FDS looks very similar to the initial input HRR profile. At the fully developed fire regime with peak HRR of 317 kW, the HRR of transient ignition source fluctuates with an amplitude of approximately 30–40 kW, whereas the HRR of the fixed fire on the electrical panel-A with relatively small peak value of 45 kW is constant. As shown in  Fig. 5 (a), the HRR of transient fire was not affected by the different cubic cell sizes of 2.5 cm, 5 cm, and 10 cm, and different vertical loca- tions of ignition source: floor surface and 0.61 m high from the floor.
Fig. 6 shows the effect of changing cubic cell size on the heat flux near an electrical panel-B due to a transient fire flame located either on the floor surface or 0.61 m high from the floor. The change of cubic cell size had little effect on the HRR profile as ultimately the fuel would mix with oxygen and burn in the eddy dissipation combustion model. However, it affects the heat flux at measurement locations of B1and B3 near the left side of the panel-B. By decreasing cubic cell size, the maximum value of heat flux at the fully developed fire regime decreases. However, there is little difference between heat flux distributions for the conditions of 5 cm and 2.5 cm cell sizes. For the cell size of 10 cm, the heat flux distribution is affected by the measurement location change in vertical direction near panel-B. For the cell sizes of 5 cm and 2.5 cm, on the other hand, it is not influenced by vertical position change of the numerical heat flux measurement device. When the transient ignition source is placed on the floor surface, the maximum value of heat flux for the cell size of 5 cm decreases with increasing measurement position in vertical direction. Considering simulation time and accuracy of the  calculation, the optimal cubic cell size and total number of cells were determined 5 cm and 105,600, respectively.
It is notable that the peak heat flux distribution at the measurement location of B1 looks similar regardless of transient ignition source location, except the condition of 10 cm cell size and transient location of 0.61  m. For  the  radiant heat  flux  aspect, placing a  transient ignition
source at the middle between electrical panels and 0.61 m higher from the floor provides more conservative results than the transient fire
Fig. 5. HRR evolution calculated with different total number of cells for different ignition sources: (a) transient fire and (b) electrical panel fire.
Fig. 6. Radiative heat flux received at location (a) B1 (0.95 m high) and (b) B3 (1.53 m high) for the transient fire, sensitivity to the total number of cells; inserts show the heat flux distribution for a selected segment up to 120 s at the fire growth regime.
located on the floor surface, to evaluate target damage due to the fire. The target damage time when the heat flux at locations of B1 and B2 reaches the radiant heat flux threshold of 6 kW/m2  was significantly
affected by the vertical measurement location. For the cell sizes of 5 cm and 2.5 cm, the damage time at B3 was delayed by 15–18 s more than that of B1. The damage time is 63 s for 2.5 cm cell size and 61 s for 5 cm cell size at B1 location, whereas it is 78 s for 2.5 cm and 79 s for 5 cm at B3 location.
Fig. 7 illustrates the temperature distribution at the same measure- ment locations with the same simulation conditions as those used in Fig. 6. The temperature near panel-B did not reach the temperature damage threshold of 205 ◦C at all the simulation conditions used for the transient fire. However, temperature distribution was affected by increasing total number of cells. For the cell size of 10 cm, the maximum temperature is predicted to be larger than those of 5 cm and 2.5 cm, and decreases with increasing vertical measurement location. On the other
hand, the temperature distribution for the cell sizes of 5 cm or 2.5 cm is little affected by measurement point change in vertical direction. For the transient fire located on the floor surface, the temperature at the fully developed fire regime at B3 measurement location fluctuates more than
that at B1. This is because the transient fire flame may exist intermit- tently near B3 location as shown in Fig. 7(b). The fire flame-like area in
the inserted fire images in Fig. 7(b) represents the area where HRR per unit volume is more than 200 kW/m3, at t  200 s after the transient fire.
It is seen that the height of fire flame-like area is very similar to vertical position of the B3 measurement location.
Fig. 8 shows the change of heat flux near the right side of panel-A and the left side of Panel-B when an electrical fire with peak HRR of 45kw
occurs on the front surface of panel-A. Although a fixed fire occurs on panel-A, the maximum heat flux ranging from 0.8 to 1.0 kW/m2 near panel-B is larger than that ranging from 0.01 to 0.04 kW/m2 near panel-
A by two orders of magnitude. Since the heat flux near both electrical panels does not exceed the threshold value of 6 kW/m2, a fire by fixed ignition source in an electrical panel would not damage the target cables
in the neighboring panel. Fig. 9 shows the temperature distribution for the same simulation conditions as those used in Fig. 8. Unlike the result of the heat flux distribution, the temperature distribution is observed similar near both electrical panels except the A3 measurement location. This is because hot gas from the ignition source on the front surface of panel-A flows above the panel-A.
Fig. 7. Temperature variation of changing total number of cells at the different measurement locations of (a) 0.95 m high and (b) 1.53 m high from the floor, near the left side of the panel-B.
Fig. 8. Heat flux variation by a fire from fixed ignition source on front surface of the electrical panel-A at the three different measurement points near (a) right side of panel-A (b) left side of panel-B: A1and B1 (0.95 m high), A2 and B2 (1.24 m high), and A3 and B3 (1.53 m high).
3.2.Focused-scope fire PRA
The ignition frequency of the transient fire damaging the target was determined by assessing the fraction of the plant ignition frequency applicable to the transient ignition source for the total plant ignition frequency, referring to the NUREG-2169 guidance (U.S. NRC, 2015b). To calculate the fraction of the total plant ignition frequency associated with the electrical panel fire scenario, it was assumed that the fire area where the electrical panel is located occupies 5% of the total transient ignition frequency for the total area of the plant. Namely, the assumed fraction value of 5% is the ratio of the weight factor applied to panel fire area to the sum of the weighting factors applied to all other area located throughout the plant. However, this approach was performed in the absence of a full existing fire PRA. If a full fire PRA existed and was available, the factors would be calculated based on area specific weighting factors and apportionment of the total transient fire frequency to each area of the plant, using the methodology outlined in NUREG/CR-6850 (U.S. NRC, 2005). The 5% value of the ratio is considered reasonable since the electrical panel fire area was assumed to
be a circulating water intake structure building (a separate plant structure). The assumption of 5% is reasonable based upon the analysts understanding of the electrical panel fire area, versus other plant fire areas. The plant wide ignition frequency values for transient fires caused by welding and cutting, and transients referred by NUREG-2169 (U.S. NRC, 2015b) are as follows:
Bin 24- plant wide components – transient fires resulting from welding and cutting: 4.79E-03 fires/year.
Bin 25- plant wide components – transients: 8.54E-03 fires/year.
The total ignition frequency for the transient fires applicable to fire area where there are electrical panels was calculated assuming an overall fraction of 5%, as follows:@3
For a transient fire at any given location in the electrical panel fire area, the percentile ratio of the floor area associated with the transient fire to the total available floor area for transient fire location in the
electrical panel fire area was calculated 0.1% considering the transient fire size less than 0.37 m2. Accordingly, the ignition frequency for a
Fig. 9. Temperature variation by a fire from fixed ignition source on front surface of the electrical panel-A at the three different measurement points near (a) right side of panel-A (b) left side of panel-B.
transient fire with fire size of 0.37 m2 in the electrical panel fire area used in the fire modeling was calculated 6.67E-07 fires/year.
The automatic suppression system and detectors to detect heat or smoke should be considered in the focused fire PRA, applying NUREG/ CR-6850, Appendix P guidance (U.S. NRC, 2005) to the fire areas where they are equipped. For any credited automatic suppression system, the failure probability of the automatic suppression system is typically referred by the guidance for use of the fire PRA. The automatic fire suppression system could be credited by identification of initial opera- tion time of the system and the time when the target starts to be damaged due to fire flame. If the automatic system activates before the target damage time, it would limit the fire risk. In this study, however, no automatic fire suppression system or detectors were applicable because the electrical panel fire area is in the open space. The credit for the manual suppression system is confirmed by identifying target damage time and the mean non-suppression probability specified in NUREG-2169 (U.S. NRC, 2015b). The detection time for a fire in the fire area without detectors is usually considered to be 15 min, which is the time associated with fire detection by secondary indications such as equipment and instrument alarms due to damage of associated circuits, or by direct detection by plant personnel. Since the target damage time for a transient fire by the fire modeling analysis was less than 1 min, the manual suppression was not credited for the focused-scope fire PRA.
If the circuit failures of concern were due to a fire-induced hot short,
a hot short probability could be applied to quantify the probability value of a fire affecting the target cable, causing hot short failures. However the failures for the traveling screens related to the electrical panels were not the result of fire-induced hot shorts, so the spurious operation probability was not applied.
For NPPs that have developed a full fire PRA, the CCDP value is calculated by assessing the impact of the damaged targets on the plant model. Assuming there is no full scope fire PRA model, for the NPP with a deterministic fire protection program, the CCDP was conservatively assumed to be 0.1 based on engineering judgment to represent a sig- nificant impact to the plant safety. This value is consistent with CCDP values that have been assumed for fires that require abandonment of the main control room (U.S. NRC, 2005).
If an operator action can mitigate the target damage caused by a fire, the probability associated with the operator action would be applied to the fire PRA model. The appropriate human reliability analysis (HRA) of the human failure event (HFE) to define the human error probability (HEP) for the operator action is applied to the proper sequence in the fault tree used for the fire PRA quantification. To reflect the effect of the fire on the operator action failure probability, the HEP associated with the full power internal event PRA model would be typically adjusted by using the NUREG-1921 guidance (Cooper and Lewis, 2012). Since there are no operator actions identified for operating traveling screens if damaged due to fire, the probability associated with the operator action was not considered at the focused-scope fire PRA. Taking into account the factors mentioned above, and assuming that the probabilities of hot short and operator action are not applicable to this scenario, the CDF was calculated as follows:@4
where IGF is ignition frequency representing frequency of fires per reactor year of operation; NSP is non-suppression probability which is conditional probability of failing suppression given a fire; SF is severity factor which is conditional probability of damage outside the ignition source given a fire; CCDP is conditional core damage probability which is conditional probability of reactor core damage given the fire damage; and CDF is core damage frequency which is an expected number of core damage events per unit of time (U.S. NRC, 2005).
In the defense in depth aspect, plant control such as transient combustible control and housekeeping controls may mitigate the calculated risk by reducing the ignition probability of the postulated transient fire. Also, the application of conservative peak HRR and no manual suppression assumption provide additional likelihood that the transient fire in electrical panel fire area can be suppressed before target damage. The application of the 98th percentile HRR for the fire modeling provides an additional safety margin.
4.Conclusions
In this study, we assumed a sample potential compliance-related issue with deterministic separation criteria. The primary methods of resolution would typically be an expensive plant modification, such as a passive fire barrier or enclosure for one of the panels, which could create design and operational challenges since it is an outdoor configuration. The relative contribution of fire risk for the sample separation issue of a nuclear power plant adopting the deterministic fire protection plan was quantitatively assessed using a proposed focused-scope fire PRA pro- cedure and fire modeling. The main conclusions of this study are as follows:
1.Fire modeling showed that two electrical panels were not negatively affected at the same time due to fire from a fixed ignition source in a panel. However, if there is a transient fire between the two electrical panels, the two panels can be negatively affected at the same time. Because the panel is located in the open space, the panel was damaged by radiant heat flux rather than hot gas due to fire. Unlike the FDT model, the FDS model predicted the time when the panels are damaged by a transient fire. The estimated time to damage the panels was too short for the operator to detect and extinguish the fire. Thus, the fire modeling results could not be used in the risk assess- ment. Nevertheless, if the area in which the electrical panels are located is controlled as a no-access zone, no transient fire will occur and eventually the two panels will not be adversely affected by the possible fire. Accordingly, controlling the access to the transient ignition source near the electrical panel area can be a good option to resolve the compliance-related issue.
2.A relatively conservative fire PRA modeling of the specific configu- ration resulted in a calculated fire CDF 6.67 E-08/yr. If the change in risk between this as built configuration versus a deterministically compliant configuration (i.e., only one train of electrical panels damaged by fire), the resultant change in risk would be an even lower value. These low values would be considered an acceptable change under a risk informed fire protection program in the US, where the self-approval threshold, per Regulatory Guide 1.205 (U.S. NRC, 2009a), is less than 1 E-07/yr. Change in CDF, as long as de- fense in depth and safety margins are maintained. So, even though this was a research activity with sample values, the risk impact of the scenario was observed to be small and would likely be considered acceptable under a risk-informed regulatory framework.
Authorship Contribution Statement
Jaiho Lee: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Simulation, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Francisco Joglar: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Calculation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Usama Farradj: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Calculation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Andrew Ratchford: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Calculation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Conceptualization, Supervi- sion, Project administration, Writing - review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest for the manuscript entitled “Fire risk assessment to develop a compliance strategy for sample redundant electrical panels at a nuclear power plant based on deterministic fire protection requirements” for consideration by Prog- ress in Nuclear Energy.
Acknowledgement
This work was funded by the Korea Hydro & Nuclear Power Co., Ltd. Of South Korea [Grant Number A15LP07] and conducted in collabora- tion with JENSEN HUGHES, Inc. In United States.
