<title>Benefits of the EUMETSAT Polar System – Second Generation (EPS-SG) for Arctic and Northern Regions Monitoring and Applications</title>
<author>Peter Schlüssel & Bojan Bojkov</author>
<Affiliation>EUMETSAT, Darmstadt, Germany</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radiological Protection</Journal>
<Publishing_house>IOP Publishing</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/07038992.2019.1598853</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/07038992.2019.1598853</URL>
ABSTRACT
The EUMETSAT Polar System – Second Generation (EPS-SG) is under development to follow the first generation EPS from 2022 onwards. EPS-SG will provide 9 observation missions in a dual satellite system in support of operational meteorology, climate monitoring and envir- onmental services covering the ocean, atmosphere, land, cryosphere, and biosphere, to the extent they interact with, drive, or are driven by meteorology and climate. The benefits of EPS-SG for the Arctic and Northern regions cover a wide range of monitoring and user applications.
RE´SUME´
Le  syst`eme  polaire  EUMETSAT  de  deuxi`eme  g´ene´ration  (EUMETSAT  Polar  System-Second Generation,   EPS-SG)   est   en   cours   de   d´eveloppement   pour   suivre   les   EPS   de   premi`ere g´en´eration  `a  partir  de  2022.  EPS-SG  fournira  neuf  missions  d’observation  dans  un  double syst`eme  satellitaire  `a  l’appui  de  la  m´ete´orologie  op´erationnelle,  de  la  surveillance  du  climat et  des  services  environnementaux  couvrant  l’oc´ean,  l’atmosphe`re,  la  terre,  la  cryosphe`re  et la   biosphe`re,   dans   la   mesure   ou` ils   interagissent   avec   ou   bien   sont   entra^ın´es   par   la m´ete´orologie  et  le  climat.  Les  avantages  de  l’EPS-SG  pour  l’Arctique  et  les re´gions  nordiques couvrent  un large  ´eventail  d’applications  de  surveillance et  autres  usages.
Introduction
The EUMETSAT Polar System – Second Generation (EPS-SG) is the European contribution to a joint European-United States polar satellite system,  called  the Joint Polar System (JPS). Through this inter- national partnership EUMETSAT will have the responsibility for developing and operating meteoro- logical satellites in the mid-morning (local time) orbit. Following the EPS (Klaes et al. 2007) from 2022 onwards, EPS-SG will cover 9 observation missions (Schlu€ssel  and  Kayal  2017),  dedicated  to  atmospheric sounding and imaging. The observation missions con- sist of instruments, satellite, space-to-ground interface, ground segment, and ground-segment-to-user interfa- ces. The space segment of EPS-SG will consist of a 2- satellite system, Metop-SG-A and -B, flying in a low Earth orbit (LEO) at an altitude of about 820 km and      a 09:30 descending equatorial crossing time. The observation missions will provide for new and innova- tive capabilities compared to the current operational system EPS. The missions, their enhancements
compared to EPS and their innovative capabilities are listed in Tables 1 and 2, together with the user appli- cations benefiting.
The development of  EPS-SG  is  user  driven. Therefore, its definition has  been  such  that  the  benefit of the system maximises the impact on user applications relevant to operational meteorology, climate monitoring, and environmental services driven or linked to meteor- ology. The applications identified as important are
Global numerical weather prediction (global NWP) Regional   numerical    weather    prediction (regional NWP)
Nowcasting (NWC) and very short-range forecast- ing (VSRF)
●Climate monitoring (CM)
●Air quality monitoring and forecasting
●Composition-climate interactions (CCI)
●Ozone-surface-UV interaction
●Operational oceanography
●Hydrology and water management
●Land surface interactions
Table 1. EPS-SG sounding missions, their enhancements, innovations and applications benefiting.
Table 2. EPS-SG imaging missions, their enhancements, innovations and applications benefiting.
The 9 observation missions are supported by the following instruments:
Instruments carried by Metop-SG-A
●The Infra-red Atmospheric Sounding Interferometer – New Generation (IASI-NG), a cross-track scanner with a wide swath that pro- vides hyper-spectral soundings in the  spectral region ranging from 3.62 to 15.5 mm with a spec-
tral resolution of 0.25 cm—1 and a spatial sampling
of 25 km at nadir. This instrument is being devel- oped by the French space agency CNES (Crevoisier et al. 2014).
●The METimage, a multiple-purpose optical cross-
track imager with 20 spectral  channels  in  the  region between 0.443 to 13.345 mm that supports cloud and surface imaging with  a spatial sampling  of 500 m at nadir and a swath width of 2670 km.  This instrument is being developed by the German
space agency DLR (Wallner et al. 2017).
●The Micro-Wave Sounder (MWS), providing all- weather temperature and water-vapour  soundings by wide-swath cross-tack scanning in the spectral domain from 23.8 to 229 GHz at a spatial sampling of 17 km at nadir and a swath width of  2300 km. This instrument is being developed by ESA (Schlu€ssel and Kayal 2017).
●The Radio Occultation (RO) receiver, measuring all-weather high vertical resolution refractivity pro- files by tracking GPS (Global Positioning System), Galileo, BeiDou, and QZSS (Quasi Zenith Satellite System) navigational satellites. This instrument is being      developed      by      ESA      (Schlu€ssel      and Kayal 2017).
●The Multi-viewing Multi-channel Multi-polarisa-
tion Imager (3MI) provides aerosol and cloud imaging in the optical spectrum from 0.41 to 2.13 mm at a spatial sampling of 4 km at nadir and a  swath width of 2200 km. This push-broom instru- ment is being developed by ESA (Fougnie
et al. 2018).
●The Sentinel-5 for nadir-viewing ultra-violet, vis- ible, near-infra-red, short-wave-infra-red sounding of atmospheric trace gases, measuring in the spec- tral domain between 0.27 and 2.4 mm with a spec- tral resolution of 0.05 to 1 nm at a spatial sampling
of 7.5 km at nadir and a swath width of 2670 km. This push-broom instrument is being developed by ESA   on   behalf   of   Copernicus   (P´erez   Albin~ana et al. 2017)).
Instruments carried by Metop-SG-B
●The Scatterometer (SCA), measuring back-scattered radar signals in the 5.55 GHz  band  (C-band)  for  the retrieval of sea surface wind vectors and land surface  soil  moisture  at  a   spatial   resolution   of 25 km and a swath width of 2 660 km. The new instrument measures in cross-polarisation mode to allowing to observe higher wind speeds than its predecessor. This instrument is being developed by ESA (Stoffelen et al. 2017).
The Micro-wave Imager (MWI), a conical scanner measuring precipitation and cloud liquid  water  in 18 spectral channels, partially polarised within the spectral region between 18.7 and 183 GHz at a spa- tial sampling of 7 km (footprint size 10 to 50 km) and a swath width of about 1650 km. This instru- ment   is    being    developed    by    ESA    (Accadia et al. 2013).
The Ice Cloud Imager (ICI), a conical scanner measuring ice-cloud variables, snowfall, and water vapour in 11 spectral channels between  183  and  664 GHz at a spatial sampling of 7.5 km (footprint size 16 km) and a swath width of about 1650 km. This instrument is being developed  by  ESA (Accadia et al. 2013).
●The Radio Occultation (RO) receiver.
Three copies of both Metop-SG-A and Metop-SG-B with associated instruments will be built and flown in sequence,  which  will   cover   a   total   lifetime   of about 21 years.
LEO systems are thought  of  being  complementary to satellites in the geostationary Earth  orbit  (GEO).  The latter do not provide meaningful measurements poleward of about 60○  latitude.  While  measurements of single LEO satellites revisit the same area only once (shortwave spectrum) or twice (thermal infra-red and micro-wave spectra) per day, the temporal sampling characteristics from GEO satellites are generally better. However, in polar regions the  revisit  frequency  of  LEO satellites is increased and reaches up to 14 over- passes per day in regions close to  the  poles.  This  makes the LEO system attractive also for nowcasting and short-range weather forecasts, provided that the timeliness of data provision is adequate for these user applications. This is achieved by EPS-SG via its Direct Data Broadcast (DDB) service, allowing local users to receive the actual observation mission data as the sat- ellites pass over their receiving stations. Furthermore, EPS-SG satellites are complemented by satellites in the early afternoon and early morning orbits  by  the  United States and China, respectively, as coordinated  by CGMS (Coordination Group for Meteorological Satellites), pursuing the end-to-end  perspective between meteorological satellite operators. Up to 42 overpasses (14 times, 3 satellites) will be available per day, providing a sampling every 34 minutes.
Regional numerical weather prediction
Users of regional NWP outputs continually demand products of increased quality,  to  improve  forecasting of extreme events, such as storms and floods. Better representation of atmospheric, oceanic and land sur- face processes strongly drive the use of new prognos-  tic variables in forecast models. Among these it is expected that clouds, aerosols, and  trace  gases  will play a larger role in future models, while current atmospheric data assimilation will evolve  towards  Earth system analysis and modelling like the coupled atmosphere-wave-ocean models being tested at the European Centre for Medium-range Weather Forecasting (Laloyaux et al. 2016). The horizontal grid size of regional NWP models for the Arctic and Northern  regions  is  currently  at  about  2.5 km  (Mu€ller et al. 2017) and will decrease soon to  about  1 km or less. The rapid growth of errors in the initial condi- tions demand ever increasing enhancements and inno- vations in measurements. This demand for error minimisation has driven EPS-SG mission require- ments and will result in better prediction of  tropical and extratropical cyclones, convective systems, polar lows, and Arctic fronts. Particularly in the  polar  regions the observational network over  oceans  is  sparse when disregarding satellite measurements (Kristi´ansson  et  al.  2011).  Therefore,  a  multitude  of satellite data, including those of the first generation Metop satellites are assimilated into the regional fore- casts in the Arctic to improve the prediction of polar lows  (Randriamampianina  et  al.  2011;  Mu€ller  et  al. 2017). Improvement of regional forecasts is also essen- tial for regional sea ice forecasting by coupled sea-ice ocean models, driven by assimilation of satellite- derived ice concentration and sea surface temperature (Gascard et al. 2017).
Traditional variables for assimilation into regional weather forecast models are profiles of temperature, water vapour and horizontal wind vectors. The model results can only be improved if fed with frequent accurate observations under clear and cloudy condi- tions. EPS-SG accounts for these needs in providing temperature profiles with increased information con- tent from IASI-NG in clear and partly cloudy condi- tions, particularly in the planetary boundary layer. IASI-NG will also provide improved humidity profiles, for the benefit of cloud and  precipitation  forecasts.  The infrared sounding will be complemented with enhanced microwave soundings from MWS, providing increased temperature and humidity information in cloudy situations. Profiles of horizontal wind vectors will be obtained by means of atmospheric motion
vectors (AMVs) from cloud or water-vapour struc-  tures tracking by METimage. The height assignments  of the AMVs will be done via the CO2-slicing height (Holz et al. 2006) of the cloud-top-pressure derived from IASI-NG. Substantial improvements are expected compared to those AMVs from the first generation EPS  (Horv´ath  et  al.  2017)  due  to  the  better  spatial sampling of METimage, more spectral channels, and higher accuracy of cloud-top pressure from IASI-NG.
Further observational variables important for regional NWP in the Arctic will be surface variables,  such as surface wind speed and vectors over sea, land surface soil moisture and  surface  temperature  over sea, ice, and land. Wind vectors over sea will be pro- vided by the new SCA instrument with enhanced spa- tial resolution of 25 km compared to 50 km of its predecessor, complemented by wind speed measure- ments from MWI. It has been shown that scatterome- ter data provides important information for the forecasting of polar low situations  (Furevik  et  al. 2015). Temperature of all surfaces  will  be  measured  by METimage with higher accuracy and denser sam- pling than before, complemented by IASI-NG, provid- ing coarser spatial resolution but better accuracy. This will provide an opportunity for valuable cross calibra- tion between both instruments. Soil moisture meas- urements, an important parameter in NWP, will be provided at the near-surface levels by the scatterome- ter (Brocca et al. 2017).
Sea ice variables such as extent, coverage, drift, sur-
face temperature, type, and concentration are import- ant boundary conditions of NWP models over ocean. Over land, snow variables like cover, surface tempera- ture, water equivalent, wet-dry status, and albedo play an equally important role as boundary conditions in NWP models. SCA, MWI, and METimage will pro-  vide distributions of these variables in polar regions.
New variables of which use in NWP is making sub-
stantial progress are cloud and precipitation as well as aerosol measurements. These will readily be supported by products from MWI, ICI, 3MI, and METimage.
These improvements will be essential for the obser- vation and prediction of polar lows, whose  numbers and distribution over the Arctic Ocean is  increasing due to  the  decrease  in  sea  ice  extent  (Zabolotskikh  et al. 2015).
Nowcasting
In the EPS-SG era, nowcasting needs will increasingly be fulfilled by high-resolution NWP models to pro- vide VSRF adapted to regions and scales of interest.
Their observational needs will be temporally and spa- tially more stringent than for the regional NWP, how- ever, and will be supported by timely availability  of  data from LEO through the use of DDB. The variables of interest for VSRF will be the same as for regional NWP, although with higher spatial and temporal sam- pling. Nowcasting of severe weather will be primarily supported by data from EPS-SG’s sounding missions. The VSRF will be complemented by cloud and water vapour imagery from METimage.
Nowcasting applications dedicated to  marine  and air traffic include the prediction of ice fog, frost, and visibility on shortest time scales (Gultepe et al. 2014). Measurements from METimage will be important to support this application. Optical and micro-wave imaging with METimage and MWI, respectively, will support  the  VSRF  of  high-impact  weather  (Otsuka  et al. 2016). Monitoring of sea ice drift is equally important to protect marine traffic. The use of optical imagery, scatterometry and micro-wave imaging sup- port  this  service  (e.g.  Emery  et  al.  1991;  Lavergne   et al. 2010). The METimage, SCA, and MWI instru- ments on-board the Metop-SG satellites will readily support this application.
Detection of wildfires is an important input to air pollution and emissions warnings  in  inhabited  regions. Multi-spectral optical imagery from  MODIS  on NASA’s Aqua satellite is used to detect fires and smoke (e.g. Giglio et al. 2003; Li et al.  2014).  METimage will provide the same capability, but at a slightly higher spatial sampling of 500 m.
Increasing amounts of solar ultra-violet (UV) radi- ation are having negative effects on life on Earth, par- ticularly in polar regions. This demands monitoring  and use in VSRF, to support the protection of human health and environment in general. Satellite soundings in the ultra-violet by the TROPOMI instrument on- board the Sentinel-5P satellite prove to be useful to monitor the UV radiation at the Earth’s surface (Lindfors et al. 2018). These measurements will be continued operationally by the Sentinel-5 instrument on-board the Metop-SG-A satellite.
The monitoring, detection, and quantitative ana- lysis  of volcanic ash  is essential  for the protection of  air traffic. The probability of ash, ash top height, mass loading, effective particle radius, volcanic cloud alerts, cloud vertical growth rate anomalies, and volcanic thermal anomalies are important variables to be deter- mined. In polar regions, the measurements of these variables relies on polar orbiting satellites carrying optical imaging and sounding instruments (e.g. Pavolonis et al. 2015a, 2015b). EPS-SG will contribute
to this with the 3MI, METimage, IASI-NG, and Sentinel-5 missions, which will provide important information for this application and will allow for a dedicated volcanic ash analysis by means of direct measurement and sensor fusion.
Finally, forecasting of urban  storm-water  run-off  for use in flood warnings will benefit from the optical imagery provided by METimage and micro-wave imagery from MWI data of rainfall in VSRF models.
Arctic ocean models
Ocean state  forecasting benefits from the assimilation  of scatterometer data, as shown in a  study  on  a coupled   atmosphere-wave-ocean   model   (Laloyaux  et al. 2016). The use of SCA and also MWI in such models will have an important impact on downstream user services related to forecasting warnings for off- shore industry and marine transport in the Arctic, including surge and shelf modelling. Variables on sea  ice that will be derived from  SCA  and  MWI include sea ice extent, concentration, type, drift, and snow/ice surface temperature.
Hydrology and water management
Applications in this area, such as fluvial basins man- agement, water reservoirs evaluation, and hydrological risk mapping will benefit from measurements of rain- and snowfall (e. g.  Michaelidis  et  al.  2009;  Levizzani et al. 2011) by MWI and ICI, snow detection and effective snow cover (Romanov et al. 2003) from vis- ible/infra-red imagery provided by METimage,  wet/ dry snow status (Royer et al. 2010) and snow-water equivalent (Shi et al. 2016) from micro-wave radiom- etry (MWS and MWI), and soil moisture from SCA (Wagner et al. 2013). Land (e.g. Masiello et al. 2015)  and snow-surface temperature (e. g. Hall et al. 2004)  will be measured by METimage.
Land-surface analysis
The land surface interacts with the  atmosphere  through numerous processes and its description is important when characterising land-atmosphere exchange, land-biosphere interaction, and ecosystem processes. EPS-SG will provide a number of measure- ments of relevant variables. Vegetation cover, fraction  of absorbed photosynthetically active radiation,  and leaf area indices, are important biophysical variables that  will  be  measured  by  METimage  (Garc´ıa-Haro   et al. 2018). Biomass burning constitutes an important
source of atmospheric aerosols and greenhouse  gases on the one hand and on the other affects the hydro- logical and biogeochemical cycles. Wild-fire parame- ters to be measured by METimage comprise fire risk, detection, radiative power, and scar identification (Trigo et al. 2011).
Optical imagery, together with scatterometry from satellites are important contributors to the character- isation of permafrost and its temporal change through the provision of proxy parameters such as surface temperature, land cover, lake extent and ice cover, soil moisture (e.g. Trofaier et al. 2017; Ulrich et al. 2009).  These will be provided by METimage and SCA.
Atmospheric composition
Monitoring of stratospheric ozone depletion is accom- plished through the provision of accurate information on the evolution of the total column ozone (e.g. McElroy and Fogal 2008) and its effect on the surface ultra-violet radiation as well as the monitoring  of ozone depleting substances or substances that can be used to constrain models of ozone depletion. Corresponding observables include chlorine monox- ide, bromine monoxide, nitric acid, stratospheric aero- sol optical depth, nitrogen dioxide, and hydrochloric acid (Loyola et al. 2009). Sentinel-5 and IASI-NG on- board the Metop-SG-A series will be set up to meas-   ure  these  variables  (Ingmann   et   al.   2012;   Wespes et al. 2009).
As laid down by the Kyoto protocol, the monitor-
ing of composition-climate interactions requires the observation of a number of atmospheric constituents (Hollingsworth et al. 2008). These are related to radi- ation and dynamics, such as ozone and water vapour  profiles and emissions of greenhouse gases, such as methane, carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and others. Both Sentinel-5 and IASI-NG will contribute to the monitoring of these constituents.
Climate monitoring
All instruments of Metop-SG-A and -B will provide fundamental and thematic climate data records, including a large number of essential climate variables as defined by the World Meteorological Organization (Schulz et al. 2009; Hollmann et al. 2013). Based on existing infrastructure at EUMETSAT and its Satellite Application Facility on Climate  Monitoring  (CM  SAF), existing records from EPS will be continued throughout the EPS-SG operational phase. The cali- bration of the instruments follows strict requirements
on traceability to basic standards. Inter-calibration of sensors on successive satellites will ensure continuity throughout the EPS and EPS-SG eras.
Summary
The EPS-SG is under development by EUMETSAT to follow the first generation EPS from 2022 onwards for an operational lifetime of 21 years. All 9 observation missions to be implemented will provide important measurements relevant to Arctic and Northern regions monitoring and applications. In that regard the 3 new missions: 3MI, MWI, and ICI, along with IASI-NG, represent a major advancement in comparison to the current capabilities. Numerous user applications, including those in operational meteorology, arctic  ocean modelling, hydrology and water management, land surface analysis, atmospheric composition and climate monitoring will benefit from  observations  to  be provided by EPS-SG. The system is being  opti- mised following an extensive user  consultation  that has provided requirements for the various observables needed by their applications. Close cooperation with other  organisations,  operating  complementary meteorological satellites in the frame of the space component of the global observing system, will ensure that the user needs and expectations will be fulfilled.
Acknowledgement
The authors thank the two anonymous reviewers for their thorough review and valuable comments.
