<title>Radiation protection in dental radiology – Recent advances and future directions</title>
<author>V. Tsapaki</author>
<Affiliation>Medical Physics Dpt, Konstantopoulio Hospital, 142 33, Nea Ionia, Athens, Greece</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Physica Medica</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ejmp.2017.07.018</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2017.07.018</URL>
ABSTRACT
Dental radiology uses X-ray technology to diagnose and design treatment of various clinical problems related to the oral cavity and surrounding tissues. As technology quickly evolves, there are numerous X-ray modalities using different tools in the attempt to best image and treat efficiently these diseases, disorders or other related clinical conditions. The reported numbers of dental X-rays, the fact that these may be under-reported in many countries and because dental X-rays are performed more on younger individuals, whose teeth and dentition are still developing, calls for increased need on radiation protec- tion. The objectives of this paper are to report on the latest technology updates and related radiation pro- tection issues, to present future directions and define gaps. Most of existing radiation protection national and international guidelines are more than a decade old. Update is needed to account for newer technolo- gies such as cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) and digital imaging. Diagnostic Reference Levels (DRLs), a well established method for dose optimization, are not yet defined for CBCT and have to be set for various clinical indications. As far as shielding is concerned, recent data confirm that use of lead apron, even in pregnant patients, or gonadal shielding are not recommended, due to negligible radiation dose reduction. Thyroid lead shielding should be used in case the organ is in or close to the primary beam. Specifically for CBCT, leaded glasses, thyroid collars and collimation (smaller field of view (FOV) espe- cially for paediatric patients) minimize the dose to organs outside the FOV.
Keywords:
Dental
Radiation protection Optimization
1.Introduction
Radiation protection is a fundamental issue addressed numer- ous times in many organization standards, codes of practice and/ or safety guides, the most recent of which being the European [1] and the International Basic Safety Standards [2]. Both of these doc- uments are based on the most recent scientific evidence on the effects of ionizing radiation in the attempt to protect workers, members of the public and patients against the dangers arising from ionizing radiation. Dental radiology uses  X-ray  technology to address various clinical problems that cannot be treated effi- ciently, by conventional dental examination, solely. Currently, den- tists, dental surgeons and other medical professionals have a variety of X-ray systems that they can use, depending on the clin- ical problem, starting from the most straightforward such as the periapical or bitewing radiography, to panoramic, cephalometric  or cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) [3,4]. These technolo- gies can be also combined for the best treatment of the patient.
According to the latest United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) 2008 Report, the annual frequency of dental diagnostic examinations has remained fairly constant for health-care level I countries (275 dental examinations per 1000 population), whereas there has been  a  substantial increase in healthcare level II countries, from the corresponding UNSCEAR survey in 1980–1984 (0.8 per 1000 population in 1980–1984 to 16 per 1000 population in the latest survey), reach-  ing a global value of 74 dental examinations per 1000 population [5]. The UNSCEAR 2008 Report also states that 480 million diagnos- tic dental examinations are performed worldwide annually, almost all of them undertaken in level I countries. Despite the fact that the annual per caput or collective effective dose contribution is very small (much less than 1%), the enormous numbers of dental X-  rays and the fact that these may be under-reported in many coun- tries calls for increased need for radiation protection. As there is a survey to compile updated data from medical exposures currently undergoing by UNSCEAR, it would be interesting to see the results in the near future [6]. Another important issue is that dental X-ray examinations tend to be performed more on younger individuals, whose teeth and dentition are still developing [5,7].
Due to all these reasons, a number of national organizations have produced guidelines of the safe use of X-ray radiation in dental radiology [8–12]. The most recent European report related
to the subject is the document entitled ‘‘European guidelines on radiation protection in dental radiology”, that is practically a guide to radiation protection for professional groups of dentists and staff [11]. The document takes into account all relevant knowledge and available technology and gives guidance on the application of radi- ation protection principles in dental radiology to patients, staff and public. Although providing clear and comprehensive information it is more than a decade old and relates to older European directives [13,14].
The objective of the paper is to present an overview of the radi- ation protection in dental radiology, specially focusing on the new X-ray technology and techniques introduced the recent years. Part of this work was presented at the International Conference on Medical Physics held in Bangkok, Thailand in December 2016.
2.X-ray technology and radiation dose in dental radiology
There are many types of X-ray machines using either two- dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional (3D) technology used in dental radiology which are briefly described below.
2.1.Intraoral radiography
This is the most common type of 2D radiography during which an image receptor such as direct exposure film (without the use of any intensifying screen), photostimulable phosphor (PSP), charge- coupled device (CCD), or complementary metal oxide semiconduc- tor (CMOS) is placed in the patient mouth. Depending on the region of the mouth to be investigated it can be 1) bitewing radio- graphy, imaging the crown of a tooth and the adjacent alveolar crests, 2) periapical radiography, imaging all the tooth and sur- rounding bone, or 3) occlusal radiography, which images a larger area of the mouth. The same X-ray machine is used which can be either mounted on the wall or is portable [4].
2.2.Panoramic radiography
The panoramic X-ray machine utilizes an X-ray tube and an image receptor which rotate around the patient imaging the mand- ible and maxilla as well as the supporting structures. The 2D X-ray image is produced using an image receptor which can be either a film with an intensifying screen, a PSP, a CCD or a direct conversion sensor providing a curved-plane tomogram of the teeth and jaws. Panoramic radiography has a lower spatial resolution than intrao- ral radiography. It is usually applied in cases of treatment planning or for postoperative control [4].
2.3.Cephalometric radiography
Usually a cephalometric unit is incorporated in a panoramic machine and uses a head positioning device to produce a 2D extra-oral radiograph with a special head handling device. The image receptor is most often the same as the one used for panora- mic radiography. Cephalometric radiography is applied to evaluate the head and neck as well as the whole facial symmetry and also in orthodontic diagnosis and treatment planning [4].
2.4.Cone-beam CT (CBCT)
Due to the fact that the maxillofacial region includes fairly com- plex 3D anatomy, often traditional imaging fails to address the patient clinical problem. The evolution of the  X-ray  technology has succeeded in introducing new imaging methods that can help overcome these problems. One example is dental CBCT that uses a cone- or pyramid-shaped X-ray beam directed on the pursued
maxillofacial field-of-view (FOV). The image receptor in  this  X- ray system is either a flat panel detector (FPD) or a CMOS detector. The machine is similar to a panoramic unit that, apart from the dig- ital detector, has sophisticated software to produce 3D images. The patient is standing or seating in most cases. The C-arm of the X-ray unit rotates around the patient, taking multiple aquisitions (start- ing from 200 reaching up to 600 images depending on the acquisi- tion time and the extent of the revolution pathway), that are used to produce the 3D images. The particular technology, developed the last 15 years has revolutioned the practice  of  dentistry  [3,15,16] at the expense though of higher radiation dose.
2.5.Multi-detector CT (MDCT)
This imaging procedure involves a conventional MDCT scanner that has special dental software to image the whole mouth area  and surrounding tissues. The patient is not standing as in  CBCT but he is lying on the CT bed exactly as if he would do for a CT scan. Modern MDCTs use a widened fan-shaped beam and a 2D detector that produces submillimeter images (as small as 0.5 mm) with sub-second rotation times. This technique gives in general higher doses than dental CBCT although there are studies in the recent lit- erature that investigate various technical protocols and MDCT scanners technologies that could provide acceptable image quality at low radiation dose [17–19].
3.Patient dose assessment
Radiation dose measurement is a very important tool for opti- mization. There are various dose quantities that can be used to measure patient radiation dose, depending on the X-ray system. They are described in detail elsewhere [20] and outlined briefly     in this section: 1) Incident Air Kerma (IAK) measured  in  Gray (Gy), 2) Entrance surface Air Kerma (ESAK) measured in Gy, 3)   Air Kerma–Area product (KAP) measured in Gym2, 4) Air Kerma– length product (KLP) or Dose–Width product (DWP) measured in Gym, 5) CT Air Kerma index (CTDIair) measured in Gy and 6) Weighted CTDI (CTDIw) measured in Gy. In some older X-ray machines instead of KAP we find the dose quantity called Dose Area Product (DAP). KAP is similar to DAP in diagnostic radiology. Table 1 shows main technical and dose parameters of all systems [20].
Another important dose quantity is Effective dose (E). It is used to assess the radiation risk from ionizing radiation. E is the weighted sum of each tissue equivalent dose (DE)  multiplied by  the corresponding tissue weighting factor for tissue T (wT). The unit of E is the Sv and can be used to compare modalities and tech- niques. The organs and/or tissues considered are those that are sensitive to the induction of stochastic effects  including  cancer  and heritable effects. The wT values were defined in International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) Publication 60 in 1990 [21] and were revised  in 2007  in ICRP Publication 103 [22].  As recently reported [23], E will rise by approximately 32–422%    in dental radiology due to the inclusion of salivary gland, oral mucosa, muscle, lymphatic nodes and extra  thoracic  airway  in  the list of radiosensitive tissues in the ICRP 103 publication [22]. There are a number of studies that have measured doses of radia- tion for dental radiography, but only a few have estimated effective dose [11,24]. There are still a number of radiographic techniques  for which no published data are available and some for which very different results have been reported [11]. Organ and effective doses in dental radiology are estimated using Monte Carlo computational methods such as the personal computer-based Monte Carlo (PCXMC) software [25] and the International Commission on Radi- ological Protection voxel adult male and female reference phan-
Table 1
Various technical parameters as they are reported in the recent literature for the X-ray modalities used in dental radiology [20].
toms [26], or thermoluminescent dosemeter (TLD) chips [27] or Optically stimulated luminescent dosimeters [28] in combination with anthropomorphic phantoms. There are studies in the litera- ture that report conversion coefficients for the estimation of effec- tive doses in intraoral and panoramic dental radiology from dose- area product (DAP) values (in the range of 0.008–0.132 microSv/ mGycm2 for intraoral radiography and 0.055–0.238 microSv/ mGycm2 for panoramic radiography) [29] or for CBCT (0.038–
0.146 microSv/mGycm2) [26,30]. Specifically for CBCT, the accu- racy of E estimation using conversion coefficients form DAP is questioned by Ludlow and co-authors [24]. They have concluded that the use of DAP with average conversion coefficients to calcu- late dose results in significant inaccuracy. The authors propose the use of dose–height product as a metric for estimating E due to improved accuracy.
4.Optimization in dental radiology
4.1.General considerations
Assuming appropriate justification, optimization will strongly depend on the X-ray modality used. Varying radiation protection measures should be taken for the patient and staff depending on type of X-ray procedure. As far as the X-ray machine is concerned, it must comply with national laws and/or regulations. Currently there are various published requirements by national authorities such as those of United States of America (USA) [10], Canada [8], Australia [12], United Kingdom (UK) [9], most of them more than   a decade old. Newer technology, such as CBCT or issues raised because of digital technology, are not included. The most recent publication on radiation protection in CBCT is the ICRP Publication
129 entitled ‘‘Radiological Protection in Cone Beam Computed Tomography” that provides recommendations for the safe use of CBCT published in 2015 [31]. National and/or International Organi- zations should update their documents in order to include digital imaging aspects and newer technology applied in dental radiology. Acknowledging this need, the European Federation of Organiza- tions for Medical Physics (EFOMP) has created a working group, in 2013, with the task to develop a  guideline on ‘‘Quality control  in cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT)” [32]. The document was not published until submission of current review. For X-ray machines that comply with national  laws  and  regulations,  the  use of rectangular collimation [33,34], longer cones [34] or increas- ing beam filtration [34,35] are additional ways of patient dose reduction.
In order to optimize radiological practices more efficiently in terms of radiation dose, the term Diagnostic  Reference  Level (DRL) is defined both in the European [1] and International Basic Safety Standards [2]. According to the European BSS, DRL is the ‘‘dose level in medical radiodiagnostic or interventional radiology practices, or, in the case of radio-pharmaceuticals, levels of activity, for typical examinations for groups of standard-sized patients or standard phantoms for broadly defined types of equipment”. Peri- odic assessment of patient doses and comparison with established DRLs must be done. In case of patient doses being unusually high
Table 2
Range of Diagnostic Reference Levels (DRLs), as they are reported in the recent literature for all X-ray modalities [11,38,39].
or unusually low, a local review must be performed to assess whether any corrective actions are needed. There are various DRLs published in the recent literature for the different X-ray modalities except CBCT and can be found in Table 2 [36–41]. There are no DRLs found in the recent literature for CBCT and dental MDCT examinations. As these are in dental radiology, the explorations related to the highest patient radiation dose, and because an increasing use of CBCT is observed, establishing CBCT DRLs is strongly recommended. DRLs should be preferably set for various clinical indications.
4.2.Digital imaging and dose reduction
The introduction of digital imaging in dental radiology has pro- gressed the clinical practice of dentists. Specifically for intraoral radiography, the benefits of digital imaging include better handling of X-rays, improved storage, saving in time and radiation dose. Recent studies report that as digital receptor technology is improv- ing, image quality and spatial resolution are approaching or even surpassing film imaging [4]. As digital detectors generally require lower exposure times it is evident that this eventually leads to patient dose reduction [4]. If, however, film is the method of imag- ing, then the E speed class film are preferable to D speed class as they are cheaper and result in a 40–50% dose reduction with com- parable image quality [42]. As far as instant filming and radiation dose is concerned, they fall in the  D speed group category with 4  to 6 times more dose than E speed films [34].
4.3.CBCT
The FOV size is one of the most important if not the most signif- icant factor that affects patient dose in CBCT [7,27,43,44]. It is also closely related to image quality due to X-ray scatter. Subsequently, one should investigate the different FOVs offered by the manufac- turer when choosing a CBCT machine. Taking into consideration the fact that in most clinical cases a small region of interest needs to be imaged, the user should select an X-ray system with at least one small FOV in the range of 4 4 cm2 or similar [31]. As far as the rest of technical characteristics are concerned, automatic expo- sure control (AEC) is preferred. If manual selection of kV and mA is done, then multiple choices of kV-mA combinations are recom- mended to lower exposure settings for dose optimization [44– 48]. Short scan time choice should be offered by the manufacturer for patients in high risk for movement. In order to avoid unneces-sary blurring and other movement related artefacts, manufacturers should offer appropriate immobilisation devices for the head of the patient such as special support for the forehead/back, chin rest and bite block [49].
4.4.Use of shielding
It is obvious that shielding of radiosensitive organs (gonads, eye lens, breast or thyroid) must be used when it is needed based on an individual patient by patient basis. The most important factor to consider when using shielding is the correct positioning of these devises on the patient so that no artefacts are produced and no intrusion is done to the work of X-ray machine automatic exposure control [11]. Regarding thyroid shielding, the latest literature data show that use of thyroid shield is to be advised, when performing upper anterior radiography and universal rectangular collimator used alone was more effective at reducing thyroid exposure than   a thyroid shield used with circular collimation in intraoral radiog- raphy [33]. Furthermore, the European guidelines Report 136 state that lead shielding of the particular organ should be used in those cases where the thyroid is in line of, or very close to, the primary beam [11]. Specifically for CBCT, the latest data indicate that  leaded glasses, thyroid collars and collimation minimize the dose  to organs outside the field of view [50]. Bismuth shielding for the eyes, thyroid, breast, or other organs in CBCT should be used with caution. If it is positioned after AEC has adjusted the tube current to be used, this may be beneficial. If it is placed before selection     of AEC, its effect may be totally negated by the increased current from AEC [31].
On the possible routine use of lead apron, the UK Guidance Notes [9] state that routine use of lead aprons in dental radiogra- phy is not justified whereas the European guidelines [11] report that there is no need to apply gonadal shielding. This statement     is also supported by recent literature data [3].
4.5.Pregnant patients and staff
The issue of pregnancy is always a matter of concern both for the patients entering a dentistry for various diagnostic or thera- peutic clinical problems, but also for the staff that works in the  area and wishes to become pregnant. A number of authors in the recent literature have measured uterus and/or foetus dose from dental radiography. A very interesting study very recently reported that, compared to the annual dose limit of 1 mSv for a member of the public or to the embryo/foetus of a declared pregnant worker, the order of magnitude of the radiation exposure to the foetus from a single dental examination without lead shielding is less than 1% [3]. The authors compared their dose data with those from airplane flights and background radiation. They concluded that the accumu- lated dose within a day and night or a two-hour flight would result in a radiation exposure of the same order of magnitude as the upper estimate for foetal dose in dental examinations. The authors state that the use of shielding to reduce the foetal dose is irrelevant and that the practice of inquiring pregnancy from a female patient could be discarded in dental radiology.
5.Paediatric patients
It is well known that paediatric patients are extremely radiosensitive, they have increased mitotic activity and longer life expectancy compared to adults and consequently a greater possi- bility for radiation-induced cancer [51]. Furthermore, current data indicate that cancer risk is cumulative over time. This means that each X-ray examination contributes to the total exposure of an individual and therefore increases the possibility of radiation-
induced cancer. As already mentioned, there is a larger proportion of paediatric patients that undergo dental radiographs compared to general radiography [5]. As recently reported, approximately 6– 21% of patients exposed to dental radiographs are aged 15 years and below. Therefore accurate justification is needed as a first mea- sure of patient dose reduction. Most frequently, dental radiography is required in orthodontic planning and treatment as well as dental trauma. Although traditionally 2D imaging was applied, the last years increasing use of CBCT is reported specially for orthodontic treatment. All these point to more attention to justification  for  these patients. As far as optimization is concerned, smaller CBCT FOVs specifically to fit paediatric patients are generally recom- mended. As recently reported, substantial E reduction can be achieved by using small CBCT FOVs and ultra-low-dose high- definition reconstruction while maintaining sufficient image qual- ity [52]. Lower exposure settings could also be applied provided image quality is maintained [53]. Thyroid shielding is also recom- mended in paediatric patients in big FOV CBCT scans [54]. Accord- ing to the authors, lead shielding material performed just as well as more expensive non-lead-equivalent materials and a thyroid shield that wraps around the neck may be beneficial to aid further dose reduction.
6.Conclusions
The latest technology updates and related radiation protection issues were presented. Radiation protection guidelines in dental radiology must be updated to account for newer technology such as CBCT and digital imaging. CBCT DRLs must be defined in the near future for various clinical indications. The use of lead apron even in pregnant patients for the protection of foetus or gonadal shielding are not recommended due to the negligible radiation dose. Thyroid lead shielding should be used in case the thyroid is in line of, or very close to, the primary beam provided it is posi- tioned accurately so that no artefacts are introduced to the image. Specifically for CBCT, leaded glasses, thyroid collars and collima- tion minimize the dose to organs outside the field of view.
