<title>Possible use of bisphenol-a polycarbonate in radioactive waste embedding</title>
<author>F. Hacıog˘lu a, T. O€ zdemir b, *, K.G. Kinalır a, A. Usanmaz a, 1</author>
<Affiliation>a.Middle East Technical University, Department of Polymer Science and Technology, Ankara, Turkey
b.Mersin University, Department of Chemical Engineering, Mersin, Turkey
</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2016.03.012 </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2016.03.012 </URL>
ABSTRACT
Frequent use of bisphenol-a polycarbonate in daily life results with a huge amount of polycarbonate waste. The proper utilization of this waste would be an environmental friendly approach. As polymeric materials are candidate materials for radioactive waste embedding, having an aromatic structure within the main chain, the bisphenol-a polycarbonate is a candidate material to be used as an embedding matrix for the conﬁnement of low and intermediate level radioactive waste. This possibility would partly solve the problem of huge amount of waste generated due to the usage of polycarbonate.
In this study, the possibility for the usage of bisphenol-a polycarbonate in radioactive waste man- agement was investigated regarding to radiation stability and resistance. For that purpose, changes in the properties of polycarbonate irradiated with different doses were determined. Irradiations, which were carried out for the duration of more than 8 months with an initial dose rate of 993 Gy/h, ended with a total irradiation dose of 4341 kGy to the samples. A detailed characterization of irradiated polycarbonate samples were performed by tensile, DMA, TGA, ATR-FTIR, AFM, EDX and SEM tests. The modiﬁcations within the polymer matrix have been reported. The total dose at which bisphenol-a polycarbonate could resist regarding to mechanical properties was determined.
1.Introduction
Radioactive wastes are generated from the human activities in research, medicine and industry. A safe and secure manner of radioactive waste immobilization within the radioactive waste management framework is an obligation to protect the human beings and the biotic/abiotic environment from the possible harmful effects of ionizing radiation that could arise due to the waste generated. Moreover, the wastes generated should be managed in a way that would not make an undue burden for the next generations. Besides the conventional usage of cement matrix in radioactive waste management, there are ongoing studies to investigate different type of material matrices for the immobiliza- tion of radioactive waste. Polymeric material with different appli- cation areas in daily life is an alternative material to be used as embedding matrix for the radioactive wastes. Various studies for possible use of polymers in radioactive waste management were performed (Ozdemir  and  Usanmaz,  2007,  2008,  2009;  Hacioglu et al., 2013; Cota et al., 2009; Sakr et al.,  2003).  In  one  of  the  study, possible use of low density polyethylene (LDPE) as an embedding matrix in radioactive waste management was investi- gated and it was reported that polymer immobilization could successfully become an alternative to other immobilization tech- niques regarding low level radioactive wastes (Cota et al., 2009). In another study, that was carried out for the immobilization of radioactive waste in mixture of cement, clay and polymer, it was intended to design a container by enhancing the strength and leaching characteristics of cement waste forms either by mixing epoxy polymer with cement clay or by coating cement-clay mix- tures with an epoxy layer (Sakr et al., 2003). In previous studies of our research group's, possible use of polymers in radioactive waste management were also investigated (Ozdemir and Usanmaz, 2007, 2008, 2009; Hacioglu et al., 2013)). Poly (carbonate urethane), poly(biphenyl-a-epichlorohydrin), poly (methyl methacrylate) and EPDM polymers/composites were investigated via gamma irradia- tion and possible use of these polymers as a radioactive waste embedding matrix were studied. In addition, Monte Carlo simula- tions for wastes to be encapsulated in these polymer matrices have
been studied, the activity of wastes that could be embedded into a drum and the dose rate distribution within the drum was simulated for 15, 30 and 300 years after embedding (Ozdemir and Usanmaz, 2009a, 2009b; Ozdemir, 2014).
Polycarbonate is a polyester type material and it is the second largest used engineering thermoplastics (Ebewele, 2000). Poly- carbonate has properties of extreme toughness, transparency, low color, resistance to burning. Polycarbonates are used for variety of applications while they are utilized extensively in medical, auto- motive, electrical, electronic, and technical applications (Mark and Kroschwitz, 2004). Furthermore, the superior properties make the polycarbonates to be subjected to conditions including gamma ir- radiations for several purposes such as for detection of ion beam as dosimeter, solid state nuclear track detector, sterilization of medical devices, synthesis of metal/polycarbonate nanocomposites (Massey, 2004; Hareesh et al., 2015; Tayel et al., 2015). Extensive usage of polycarbonates in daily life such as DVD, CD production and in automotive parts and in drinking water carboys results with huge amount of polycarbonate domestic waste that become an increasing problem in waste management of polycarbonate. Aro- matic types of polycarbonates are classiﬁed as non-biodegradable (Artham and Doble, 2008). It was reported that there is not an appropriate waste treatment method to landﬁll or incinerate the polycarbonate wastes (Antonakou and Achilias, 2013). To solve this problem and ﬁnd out a suitable recycling/reuse method, various studies were conducted (Artham and Doble, 2008; Nikje and Askarzadeh, 2013;  Lin  et  al.,  2007;  Elmaghor  et  al.,  2004;  Rosi et al., 2015). An alternative solution for this problem could be a solution that employs the usage of bisphenol-a polycarbonate waste as an embedding matrix in radioactive waste management. This solution would be beneﬁciary both for the management of radioactive waste and reduction of amount of domestic poly- carbonate waste that needs to be managed.
The dominant reaction of gamma radiation on polycarbonate is chain scission, however high chain stiffness makes many of the broken chains recombined (Massey, 2004). In addition, aromatic ring in the structure, enhance polycarbonate to absorb more energy from radiation source than aliphatic structure (Massey, 2004). Various studies regarding behavior of polycarbonate under electron beam and gamma radiation were conducted (Weber et al., 2010; Hareesh et al., 2013; Araujo et al., 1998; Chen et al., 2005; Kinalır, 2011; Galante and Campos, 2012). According to those  studies,  it was reported that mechanical properties and glass transition temperature were decreased via irradiation for the studies carried out with different irradiation  doses  (Hareesh  et  al.,  2013;  Chen  et al., 2005; Sinha et al., 2004). It was also reported that the exposure to 340 kGy gamma dose to of polycarbonate have not altered the degree of  both  crosslinking  and  crystallinity  (Weber et al., 2010). The other study were conducted in order to ﬁnd out damage induced in Lexan polycarbonate via gamma irradiation up to 1000 kGy via FTIR spectroscopy. FTIR study indicated that Lexan type aromatic type polycarbonate were deteriorated to a very little extent up to 500 kGy (Singh and Prasher, 2005). The total dose that bisphenol-a polycarbonate could resists is important to ﬁnd out that possibility of usage of it in radioactive waste embedding. However, studies regarding with polycarbonate degradation for higher total doses was not encountered in the literature.
In this study, both degradation and modiﬁcation of poly- carbonate under high dose rate (993 Gy/h) irradiation by gamma source was investigated for the purpose of possible use of bisphenol-a waste in the radioactive waste embedding. In addition, the total dose up to which bisphenol-a polycarbonate could resist regarding to mechanical properties was determined. Polycarbonate samples were irradiated with 4 different doses of 684, 1291, 3280 and 4341 kGy. Irradiations were performed in order to analyze
behavior of material under irradiation period. Irradiated samples were characterized by applying tensile, dynamic mechanical anal- ysis (DMA), TGAeFTIR, ATR-FTIR, SEM, EDX an AFM tests.
2.Materials and methods
The bisphenol-a polycarbonate used in this study was Lexan™ LS2 resin obtained from Sabic. Number average (Mn) and weight average (Mw) molecular weight of the bisphenol-a polycarbonate was 30,600 and 90,000, respectively, which was determined by Gel Permeation Chromatography (GPC). Dog bone and rectangular bar- shaped materials were prepared by injection molding using a small scale injection molding instrument Baby Plast model made by Permak. Dog bone and bar shaped polycarbonate specimens pro- duced meet the speciﬁcations of EN ISO 527-2 and EN ISO 20753 standards. The injection pressure was 80 bars, the barrel temper- ature was around 280 ○C and the mold temperature varied between 25 and 45 ○C. Irradiations were carried out in self-contained dry- storage gamma irradiator of Tenex Issledovatel model 60Co gamma source in the presence of oxygen. Samples were irradiated with 684, 1291, 3280  and  4341  kGy  total  doses.  The  total  dose  of  4341 kGy of irradiation was not encountered in literature regarding to polycarbonate exposed to gamma irradiation. The duration of the irradiation was approximately 8 months. Irradiation periods and dose delivered to the test specimens are given in Table 1. After the irradiation process, tensile, ATR-FTIR, DMA, TGA, SEM, EDX and AFM tests were applied to investigate the modiﬁcations that occurred in the polycarbonate. These measurements were carried out long after the irradiation due to achieving stationary state of irradiated polycarbonate via completion of radiation enhanced oxidation (Sinha et al., 2004).
Zwick Roell Z250 universal testing machine was used for tensile tests. Dog bone shaped specimens prepared according to the EN ISO 527-2 (The European Committee for Standardization, 2012) and EN  ISO 20753 (European Committee for Standardization, 2014) stan- dards. Tensile tests were conducted according to the EN ISO 527-2 standard. The test speed was chosen as  10  mm/min.  Maximum  stress at break, elastic modulus and elongation at break values were taken from the test results. Attenuated total reﬂectance e Fourier Transform Infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectra of samples were carried  out  at 25 ○C with a Perkin Elmer Spectrum BX FTIR Spectrometer. Test specimens were scanned from 4000 cm—1 to 600 cm—1 with  a resolution of 16 cm—1. Dynamic Mechanical Analysis (DMA) of samples was carried out with a Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer  Dupont Series under nitrogen atmosphere with a heat rate of 5 ○C/ min and the temperature range was 25e200 ○C. The thermogra- vimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out on a Perkin Elmer  Pyris1 TGA. TGA studies were carried out with a heat rate of 10 ○C/min and the samples were analyzed from room temperature to 800 ○C. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were taken by using a Zeiss Supra 55 Model at 10 kV in low-vacuum mode with Pt coating and original surfaces of the samples were used in the SEM studies. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) studies were carried out in non- contact mode using a Park System XE-100 SPM model instrument.
Table 1
Total irradiation doses and periods.
3.Results and discussions
3.1.Mechanical tests
Change of elongation at break, tensile strength and stress at break values upon irradiation are given in Table 2. Moreover, Fig. 1 depicts the relative change at elongation at break, tensile strength and stress at break values with respect to total doses. A gradual increase in elastic modulus values was observed, this implies that bisphenol-a polycarbonate become stiffer. The reason behind the increase in the elastic modulus values is due to the radiation induced restructuring, recombination reactions occurring after chain scission reactions. Moreover, as chain scission reaction become dominant this increase the amount of small molecules that increases the secondary bonds which makes bisphenol-a poly- carbonate stiffer via irradiation (Callister, 2007). On the other hand, tensile strength values has shown decreasing manner via irradia- tion. Tensile strength values are proportional with molecular weight and mathematically tensile stress is a function of the number-average molecular weight (Callister, 2007). Half-value- dose (HVD), deﬁned as the dose value that diminishes a mechani- cal property of any materials to 50% of its initial value under en- vironments of which conditions kept ﬁxed (Seguchi and Morita, 1999), is considered as characteristic property of radiation resis- tance for polymers. Regarding to elongation at break values, it was observed that elongation at break values are reduced via increasing total dose. It is clearly seen from Fig. 1 that HVD for tensile strength is higher than that of elongation at break. It is important to state that tensile strength is more resistant to irradiation compared with elongation at break due to secondary forces becoming important while the chain scission reactions are ongoing reveals a decrease in elongation at break. The total dose that polycarbonate can bear regarding radioactive waste management was determined as about 3280 kGy from the mechanical test results. 4341 kGy irradiated samples become brittle and tensile tests couldn't be carried out during the mechanical tests. It was observed that gamma irradia- tions changed property of polycarbonate, the non-irradiated sam- ple have a ductile behavior, whereas 1291, 3280 kGy irradiated samples behavior change to brittle. A ductile to brittle transition at room temperature was observed with the gamma irradiation.
3.2.DMA test results
Dynamic mechanical analysis results are given in Fig. 2. The glass transition temperatures for samples irradiated with different doses are given in Table 3. It is clear that the glass transition tem- perature decreased with irradiation. Gamma irradiation caused scission of molecular chains and this causes increase in the mo- lecular mobility. Molecular mobility is inversely proportional to glass transition temperature. Therefore, reduction in the glass transition temperature is an explicit indication of radiation induced degradation (Sinha et al., 2004). It should be noted that the higher the glass transition temperature the higher the stability of thematrix for the radiation induced degradation. Moreover, storage modulus values gathered from DMA analysis could be considered as elastic modulus (Kwan, 1998; ASTM International, 2013; ASTM
Fig. 1. Change of tensile properties with total dose (kGy).
Fig. 2. Change of DMA parameters with total dose (a) storage modulus (b) loss modulus (c) tan delta.
Table 2
Tensile Properties of non-irradiated and irradiated samples.
Table 3
Glass transition temperatures for polycarbonate samples.
International, 2012). It was seen that the storage modulus values increased up to 1291 kGy values. Elastic modulus values have shown an increasing pattern via irradiation and this increase could be explained as occurrence of recombination reactions after scis- sion reactions and increase in the intermolecular forces due to the more small species resulted with chain scission reactions. Further irradiation to 3280 kGy decreased the storage modulus showing  the effect of radiation induced chain scission.
It is important to observe that the storage modulus for non irradiated and 3280 kGy irradiated samples have shown a similar pattern, while 684 and 1291 kGy irradiated samples have shown also a similarity for storage modulus. For the case of non irradiated and 3280 kGy irradiated samples, the storage modulus does not vary very much with temperature before gradual decrease of the storage modulus, whereas for the 684 and 1291 kGy irradiated cases, temperature dependence was more obvious, in other words storage modulus decreased with temperature before the gradual decrease in the storage modulus. This temperature dependent behavior is due to the secondary forces. Further irradiation with increase in time period probably caused small mobile molecules to leave the polymeric matrix and lead to disappearance of the effect of secondary bonding with a decrease in storage modulus as shown in Fig. 1 for the 3280 kGy irradiated sample case.
3.3.TGA test results
Thermal stability for the matrix to which the waste be embedded is an important criteria, although the ﬁnal disposed was has very low possibility of facing with ﬁre this could effect the integrity of the matrix. TGA test results are shown in Fig. 3. Tem- peratures at which maximum weight loss and %50 weight loss were observed (Tmax and T50) are given in Table 4. According to the TGA results, all polycarbonate samples are stable up to 350 ○C until which any signiﬁcant weight loss was not observed. Within the temperature range of 400e800 ○C signiﬁcant weight loss were observed for the all of the test samples. Onset temperature for weight loss was lower for the irradiated samples compared with
Fig. 3. TG thermograms for polycarbonate samples irradiated with different total doses.
Table 4
Tmax and T50 temperatures.
non-irradiated test sample. This could be associated with chain scission reactions that generate small molecules with lower dissociation energies (i.e. resulting with lower activating energies for decomposition) leading to onset temperature for weight loss at lower temperatures. Tmax was observed at about 520 ○C and Tmax was slightly increased with irradiation due to removal of chain scission products from the polymer matrix and increase of aromatic content within the polymeric material.
3.4.SEM and EDX investigations
SEM images of irradiated polycarbonate taken at magniﬁcation of 1000 are shown in Fig. 4. The surface of the non-irradiated polycarbonate sample was rough with nano-scale surface cracks. When the sample irradiated with 684 kGy, propagations in the surface cracks were observed. For the further irradiation to total doses of 1291, 3280 and 4341 kGy, the fractures and surface roughness become more distinct.
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) results are given in Fig. 5, it was seen that the carbon to oxygen (C/O) rate (wt/wt) changed with irradiation. The C/O ratio was determined via the EDX was 3.8 which was very close to the chemical formula ratio of 4, that is theoretical value. The C/O ratio was increased with irradia- tion dose for the initial irradiation dose of 684 kGy. The increase in this ratio is due to the degradation of non-aromatic oxygen con- taining part of the bisphenol-a polycarbonate in the main chain to smaller and mobile molecules that were removed from the polymer matrix during and after the irradiation process. The decrease of C/O ratio for the case of 3820 kGy is a clear indication of the radio- oxidation showing the oxygen attack to the polymer matrix, during the irradiation process. As time passed during the irradiation, the diffusion of oxygen molecules increased resulting with the  decrease of the C/O ratio.
3.5.AFM investigation
The AFM results are given in Fig. 6. It is clearly seen from the AFM results that surface topology has changed with irradiation. The topology of non irradiated sample was relatively smooth with a distribution between 10 and 10 nm, shown as a histogram on Fig.
6. The distribution was widened for the sample irradiated with 4341 kGy and shifted to a range of 40 to 40 nm. The effect of  gamma irradiation on the surface morphology was explicitly seen with the AFM study results which was also compatible with the SEM results.
3.6.FTIR investigation
The ATR-FTIR spectrum of pristine and irradiated poly- carbonates (684, 1291, 3280 and 4341 kGy) are shown in  Fig.  7. Table 5 depicts the frequencies of the main absorption bands of bisphenol-a polycarbonate (Delpech et al., 2002; Silverstein et al., 2005; Sinha et al., 2004). According to Fig. 7, neither total destruction nor formation of new peaks and no appreciable changes were observed at the dose of 684 kGy (Singh and Prasher,
Fig. 4. SEM Images of Irradiated Polycarbonate Specimens Monitored at Magnitude of 25 k (a) Non-Irradiated, (b) 684 kGy, (c) 1291 kGy, (d) 3280 kGy, (e) 4341 kGy irradiated.
Fig. 5. C/O ratio from EDX test results.
2005). On the other side, the increase in irradiation dose resulted in signiﬁcant intensity decreases of peaks of CeH bond of methyl group (2969 cm—1), C]O bond (1771 cm—1), CeH bond of aromatic ring (1506 and 1015 cm—1), CeOeC bonds (1190 cm—1). This implies that scission of these bonds were started and proceeded with irradiation (Sinha et al., 2004). At the dose of 4341 kGy the majority of characteristic peaks were disappeared. There is no appearance of peak near 3500 cm—1 which depicts presence of OeH bonds via irradiation. The intensity decreases around peak located 1773 cm—1 indicates that chain scission occurred at the carbonate site (Kumar
et al., 2006). It was revealed that up to 684 kGy polycarbonate was
affected to a little extent.
4.Conclusions
High dose irradiations up to 4341 kGy changed mechanical properties of bisphenol-a polycarbonate. Elongation at break values show considerable decrease with irradiation. The 4341 kGy irradi- ated samples become brittle and tensile tests couldn't be carried out. A ductile to brittle transition was observed with the irradiation. Moreover, decrease in the glass transition temperature was observed from the DMA analysis test results. The tensile strength test results and DMA analysis conﬁrms and supports each other. SEM images revealed the morphological deformation of poly- carbonates. Deformation in the surface of the polycarbonate start and progress upon irradiation. EDX results have shown the radio- oxidation reaction via C/O (wt/wt) ratio. The total dose that poly- carbonate can bear regarding radioactive waste management was
Fig. 6. AFM results and histograms for (a) non-irradiated (b) 4341 kGy irradiated sample.
Fig. 7. FTIR spectrum of non-irradiated and irradiated samples.
Table 5
Main absorption peaks of bispheol-a based polycarbonate (Delpech et al., 2002; Silverstein et al., 2005; Sinha et al., 2004).
determined as about 3280 kGy from the mechanical test results.  The mechanical resistance up to 3280 kGy without any radiation protection agent usage shown that the polycarbonate has consid- erable radiation resistance and bisphenol-a polycarbonate could be a candidate polymer for the radioactive waste management. Do- mestic polycarbonate waste could be a rational source for the polycarbonate.