<title>Environmentally sound approach for imparting antibacterial and UV-	 protection functionalities to linen cellulose using ascorbic acid</title>
<author>Nabil A. Ibrahim a,⁎, Basma M. Eid a, Enas M. El-Zairy b, Elamir Emam b, Soliman Barakat b</author>
<Affiliation>a.Textile Research Division, National Research Centre, Scopus afﬁliation ID 60014618 33 El Bohouth St., Dokki, Giza, Egypt
b.Faculty of Applied Arts, Printing/Dyeing/Finishing Department, Helwan University, Cairo, Egypt</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.05.113</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.05.113 </URL>
ABSTRACT
In this work, multifunctional linen cellulose fabrics were facilely developed by using an eco-friendly ﬁnishing for- mulations and the pad-dry/microwave ﬁxation technique. Both reactant resin and citric acid have been employed as low- and zero-formaldehyde crosslinkers along with their proper catalyzing agents. Individual incorporation of ascorbic acid and selected phenolic compounds namely salicylic acid, resorcinol, and gallic acid, as natural ac- tive ingredient (AI-OH) along with PEG-400 or modiﬁed nonionic silicone-softener in ether- or ester-crosslinking formulation and their impacts on the performance, functional properties and degree of coloration of the ﬁnished fabrics were investigated. FTIR, SEM, and EDX analysis of selected samples were carried out. Results revealed that type of crosslinker, kind and concentration of active ingredient, as well as type of additive play an important role in the imparted functional properties. The durability of the imparted antibacterial and UV protection functional properties was conﬁrmed by washing test.
Keywords:
Linen cellulose
Eco-friendly crosslinking    Ascorbic   acid    Finishing formulation    Multifunctional linen cellulose
1.Introduction
Cellulosic textile materials e.g. cotton, linen, viscose, etc. are more sus- ceptible to microbial attack than the synthetic ones, most probably due to their ability to provide proper environment for microorganisms, e.g. bac- teria, fungi etc., to growth and multiplication [1,2]. An effective antimicro- bial treatment can either inhibit the growth (biostatic)  or kill  (biocidal) the harmful pathogenic microorganisms [3,4]. Antimicrobial functionalization of cellulosic textiles is necessarily used to: protect the textile user from harmful microorganisms, avoid diseases transmission, cross-infection, and offensive odors formation, as well as to safeguard the cellulosic textile material from the negative impacts of microbial growth such as staining, deterioration, and discoloration [5–8].
Moreover, based on their mode of action, antibacterial can be di- vided into types namely: i) controlled-release type, leaching type, which diffuses into and attack the pathogens on the ﬁbre surface as well as in the surrounding environment, and ii) non-leaching type, du- rable immobilized type, which acts as a barrier and as a killer for harm- ful microorganisms that come in contact [1,5,9].
Additionally, antimicrobial agents can be broadly classiﬁed into: or- ganic compounds such as triclosan [1,10], quaternary ammonium com- pounds [9,11], N-halamine compounds [12–14], chitosan [15–18], and inorganic materials like nano-metal and metal oxides [9,19–23], and immobilized enzymes [24]. Some of these antimicrobial agents, colorants and textile auxiliaries have negative impacts on both the textile consumer as well as the environment especially water pollution [1,5,25].
Recently, much interest has been given to antimicrobial agents based on certain phenolic compounds their potential applications in textile ﬁnishing to develop eco-friendly functional textiles [6,26–30]. Therefore, in the present study, ascorbic acid and certain phenolic com- pounds (Fig. 1) that exist abundantly in many natural products were se- lected as active ingredients (AIs-OH) and incorporated in an eco- friendly proper ﬁnishing formulation along with low-or zero- formaldehyde, crosslinking agent, proper catalyst MgCl2·6H2O for ether crosslinking or NaH2PO2·H2O for ester crosslinking and other ad- ditives namely, PEG-400 as a swelling agent, and nano-silicone softener, using the pad-dry/cure microwave ﬁxation method, to impart desired functionalities to linen cellulose.
2.ExperiThental
2.1.Materials
Mill-scoured and half bleached plain weave linen cellulose (120 g/m2) was used in this study.
Ascorbic acid, salicylic acid, resorcinol, and gallic acid, were pur- chased from Sigma-Aldrich. Fig. 1 shows their chemical structures. Citric acid (CA), magnesium chloride hexahydrate, sodium hypophosphite (SHP,  NaH2PO2·H2O)  (MgCl2·6H2O)  and  polyethylene  glycol (PEG-
400) were of laboratory grade chemicals. GB resin® CPN (low formalde- hyde reactant  resin  based  on  modiﬁed dimethyloldihydroxyethylene
Fig. 1. Chemical structures of the used active ingredients.
urea, DMDHEU, active matters 40 wt%, BASF/GB Chem. Egypt) was of commercial grade, and Persoftal® Nano-SIL (nonionic modiﬁed nano- emulsion  silicone   softener,   active   matter   35   wt%,   particle   size b 100 nm, Tantex chemicals) GB detergent Suppra® (wetting agent, APEO-free, detergent, foam suppressant, deaerating agent, BASF/GB chem, Egypt) were of commercial grade.
2.2.Methods
2.2.1.Combined ether-crosslinking/active ingredient loading
The linen cellulose samples were padded twice in a ﬁnishing bath containing GB-resin® CPN (25 g/L), MgCl2·6H2O (5 g/L) along with ascorbic acid or phenolic compound (0–15 g/L), as an active ingredient, and nonionic wetting agent (2 g/L) to prevent foaming, to ensure high absorbency and rapid wetting as well as to promote more level ﬁnish, to 80% wet pick up. The treated fabric samples were then dried and cured in a micro-wave oven at 900 W for 4 min. Subsequently the treated fabric samples were washed with deionized water, to remove un-reacted/unﬁxed reagents, dried and conditioned before evaluation.
2.2.2.Combined ester-crosslinking/active ingredient loading
Another set of linen fabric samples was paddled twice in ﬁnishing for- mulation containing CA (25 g/L), SHP (15 g/L), active ingredient (0–15 g/L) and nonionic wetting agent (2 g/L), to 80% wet pick up. After then, the treated fabric samples were dried/cured in a microwave oven at 900 W for 4 min, thoroughly washed, dried and conditioned before testing.
2.3.Measurements
The FTIR spectroscopic analysis was performed for both untreated and treated fabric sampled using Nexus 670 FT-IR Spectrometer, Nicolet Company, USA.
Nitrogen content (%N) of ether-crosslinked fabric samples was de- termined according to Kjeldahl method [31].
Wettability of the treated fabric samples was evaluated according to AATCC test method 39-(1980). The shorter the wetting time, the better the water absorbency is.
Antibacterial activity of treated fabric samples against Gram- positive (G+ve, S. aureus) and Gram negative (G−ve, E. coli) patho- genic bacteria was assessed using agar diffusion test, and evaluated
as zone of growth inhibition according to AATCC test method 174- 1988.
UV-blocking protection, expressed as UV-protection factor (UPF), was determined according to the Australian/New Zealand Standards: AS/NZS 4399-1996, and ranked as follows: good protection (UPF: 15–24), very good protection (UPF: 25–39), and excellent protection (UPF N 40). The higher the UPF value, the better the protecting property is.
Degree of whiteness and yellowness of fabric samples were evaluated using Color-Eye 3100 Spectrophotometer (SDL Inter).
The imparted color depth to the treated fabric samples were de- termined from the reﬂectance measurements using the Kubelka Munk equation [32] as follows: K/S = (1 − R)2 / 2R, where K/S is
the ratio of absorption and scattering coefﬁcient, R is the reﬂectance
at the wavelength of maximum absorbance (λ = 385) of the imparted brown color.
Durability of the imparted functional properties to wash (after 10 launder cycles) was assessed according to AATCC Test Method 61 (2A)-1996.
The surface morphology of selected fabric samples was observed using SEM Model Quanta SEM 250 FEG (Field Emission Gun) attached with EDX unit (Energy Disperse X-ray analysis with accelerating voltage-30 kV FEI CO. Netherlands) for the surface composition analysis of Si-loaded fabric samples.
3.Results and discussion
The present research work was carried out to enhance the coloration and functionalization of linen cellulose using certain active ingredients namely ascorbic acid, gallic acid, salicylic acid and resorcinol along with DMDHEU/MgCl2·6H2O or CA/SHP in the ﬁnishing formulations followed by padding and microwave curing. Factors affecting the coloration and functionalization of the nominated substrate such as type and concentration  of active ingredient, type of crosslinker as well as type of additive have been investigated.
3.1.Ether crosslinking/active ingredients loading
As far as the changes in the coloration and functionalization properties of the treated linen cellulose samples as a function of type and concentration of the incorporated active ingredients into the ﬁnishing formulation, the data in Table 1 demonstrate that increasing the con- centration of the included active  ingredients in the ﬁnishing formulation results in an enhancement in the nitrogen content and K/S values,           a remarkable improvement in the  imparted functional properties, i.e.  ZI  and UPF values, along with a  noticeable decrease in the  fabric wet-  ting property and the degree of whiteness (WI). The extent of variation in the abovementioned functional and coloration  properties is governed by type and concentration of the added active ingredient. The enhancement in %N, increase in wetting time, increase in the K/
Table 1
Effect of type and concentration of active ingredient on some performance properties of ether-crosslinked linen cellulose samples.
S (due to the change of color from yellow to reddish brown) as well as the decrease in the WI values of the treated linen fabric samples are  a direct consequence of: enhancing both the extent of ether-crosslinking (Eq. (1)) and ﬁxation of the added active ingredients onto/within the fabric structure (Eqs. (2) & (3)). The imparted antibacterial functionalization of the active ingredients-loaded fabric samples, expressed as inhibition zone, is a direct consequence of leaching of unﬁxed, physically bonded and/or embedded active ingredients and their damag- ing effect of phenolic compound on the DNA and/or inhibition effects by citric acid and PEG on the tested pathogenic bacteria. [28]. On the other hand, the antibacterial effect of ascorbic acid is attributed to its ability to act as a barrier for oxygen availability for the tested bacteria [33]. On the other hand, the ﬁxed/immobilized active ingredients can act as a killer/barrier for the harmful microorganisms, thereby preventing bacteria growth underneath of the ﬁnished fabric samples compared with the control one. The improvement in UV-blocking property, expressed as UPF value, by loading the active ingredients onto/within the fabric structure could be attributed to the higher extent of the crosslinking and the blocking of the porosity of the fabric structure, in the presence than in the absence of active ingredients, as well as the developing of dark reddish brown color thereby improving the capability of the ﬁnished fabric samples to shield and/or absorb the harmful UV-B radiation [29,34].
On the other hand, the variation in the abovementioned performance and protection properties is governed by: i) type and chemical structure of the active ingredient [28], ii) number and accessibility of its adjacent \\OH groups [35], extent of loading and distribution onto/within the fabric structure, iii) mode of interaction, iv) its ability to cause DNA damaging in the microorganism or acting as oxygen barrier for pathogenic bacteria [28,33], as well as v) the imparted antibacterial activity against the pathogenic bacteria, i.e. Gram-positive (S. aureus) and Gram-negative (E. coli) bac- teria, which follows the decreasing order Gram-positive N Gram negative, as direct consequence in their differences in membrane structure and ame- nability to inhibition and/or distribution [20,36].
The inclusion of any of the nominated active ingredients into the ﬁnishing formulation along with DMDHEU, as a crosslinker, and MgCl2·6H2O, as a catalyst followed by padding and microwave ﬁxation would be expected to promote the following interactions [37,38]:
Table 2
Effect of type and concentration of active ingredient on some performance properties of ester-crosslinked linen cellulose samples.
3.2.Ester-crosslinking/active ingredients loading
Individual incorporation of the nominated active ingredients in the ﬁnishing formulation along with CA/SHP ﬁnishing system followed by pad- ding the linen cellulose samples and microwave drying/curing at 900 W/for 4 min is accompanied by the following interactions [29,39]:
i)Ester-crosslinking of linen cellulose structure On the other hand the data in Table 2 demonstrate that increasing the active ingredient concentration from zero up to 15 g/L, along with other ﬁnishing additives, results in prolonging the wetting time, enhancing the extent of coloration along with decreasing degree of whiteness, and imparting of remarkable antibacterial and UV-shielding functional properties to the treated linen fabric samples, regardless of the used active ingre- dient. The extent of increasing or decreasing the obtained properties is determined by type of the incorporated active ingredient as discussed before.
Wetting time as a function of type of active ingredient follows the decreasing order: Ascorbic acid N resorcinol N gallic acid N salicylic acid ≫ none.
Both the increase in extent of coloration, expressed as K/S, and the decrease in whiteness as a function of the active ingredients follows the decreasing order: Gallic acid N ascorbic acid N resorcinol N salicylic acid ≫ none, and the enhancement in UPF value follows the same order. The antibacterial efﬁciency of the treated fabric samples demonstrates the following order: Ascorbic acid N salicylic acid N resorcinol N gallic acid ≫ none, keeping other parameters ﬁxed. The antibacterial activity of the blank fabric samples, i.e. without any active ingredients, is attributed to the negative effect
of loaded CA on pH reduction, and depression of internal pH of microbial cell thereby altering the cell membrane permeability and damage the cells [40]. The imparted antibacterial activity against the nominated pathogens follows the decreasing order: Gram-positive (S. aureus) N Gram neg- ative (E. coli), keeping the other parameters constant, as a direct consequence of the presence of an additional lipopolysaccharide-containing outer membrane in gram-negative bacteria structure in comparison with the Gram-positive ones [41]. The bigger the number of the AI-OH groups, the higher the extent of coloration, most probably due to greater oxidation of AI-OH groups [35].
On conclusion, the obtained data (Tables 1 & 2) signify that the proper active ingredients for attaining uniform natural pale yellow and uniform natural reddish brown color fabric samples, as a direct consequence of even distribution and ﬁxation of active ingredients onto/within the cellulose structure, along with improved antibacterial and anti-UV functional properties, keeping in mind both the product quality and functionality as well as safety concern, are salicylic acid and ascorbic acid respectively, regardless of the used ﬁnishing regime.
On the other hand, Figs. 2 and 3 represent the IR spectra of bleached linen fabric, treated linen fabric with ascorbic acid, and treated linen fabric with resorcinol in presence of DMDHEU or citric acid as a crosslinking agent, respectively. All treated fabrics showed a peak at around 1730 cm−1 that
Fig. 2. IR spectra of bleached linen cellulose fabric, linen cellulose treated with DMDHEU + ascorbic acid, linen cellulose treated with DMDHEU + resorcinol.
Fig. 3. IR spectra of bleached linen cellulose fabric, linen cellulose treated with citric acid + ascorbic acid, linen cellulose treated with citric acid + resorcinol.
may be attributed to the carbonyl group that existed in DMDHEU or to the carbonyl groups C_O for ester-link between citric acid and linen fabric. In case of treatment with ascorbic acid, a new peak was observed at 1659 cm−1 that can be assigned to the C_O stretching of the ascorbic acid, while in case of treatment with resorcinol, a new characteristic peak appeared at 1607 cm−1 which may be attributed to C_C aromatic, regardless of the used crosslinking agent [28,42,43].
3.3.Additives
In this part, PEG-400 and nano silicone softener were individually included into the ether and ester-crosslinking formulations to investigate their impacts on performance and functional properties of the treated linen cellulose samples. For a given set of ﬁnishing formulations and ﬁnishing con- ditions, the data in Table 3 signify that incorporation of PEG-400 (10 g/L) in the ﬁnishing formulations results in a slight increase in % N as a direct
Table 3
Effect of type of additive on some performance properties of tested linen cellulose samples.
Fig. 4. SEM and EDX spectra of: untreated linen cellulose (100%) (a & b), treated linen 100% with DMDHEU and ascorbic acid (c & d), treated with DMDHEU, ascorbic acid and nano silicone (e & f).
consequence of enhancing the swellability of fabric structure, extent of diffusion and penetration of DMDHEU as well as its extent of interaction with the\\OH groups of cellulose. On the other hand, inclusion of PEG-400 into ﬁnishing bath brings about a remarkable decrease in wetting time, a slight decrease in K/S value of the colored samples along with an enhancement in the degree of whiteness, an improvement in antibacterial activity along with a slight decrease in UPF values, regardless of the used ﬁnishing regime and the used active ingredient. Inclusion of the nano silicone softener into the ﬁnishing baths is accompanied by a slight increase in the %N a noticeable increase in wetting time, a remarkable increase in K/S values of colored substrates with a noticeable decrease in WI values, as well as a reasonable improve in both the antibacterial efﬁcacy and UV-shielding properties  of the treated substrates, irrespective of the used ﬁnishing formulation. The extent of variation in the evaluated performance properties is governed by type of active ingredient, the role of ﬁnishing additive, as well as mode of interaction with the cellulose structure via ether or ester-crosslinking. The positive role of PEG-400 in enhancing antibacterial activity is attributed to the negative impact of the loaded PEG-400 onto fabric surface on bacteria through disrupting cell membrane equilibrium thereby causing dual hydrophobic-hydrophilic behavior which in turn leads to microbial desiccation [5]. The enhancement in the surface and smoothness of the treated fabrics loaded  with  the nominated  nano-emulsion  silicone softener (particle size b 100 nm), is attributed to its ability to form a hydrophobic coated ﬁlm onto the treated substrate under the microwave ﬁxation conditions as follows (Eq. (7)) [44–46]:@7
thereby changing both the fabric surface composition as well as reducing the free energy at the treated fabric surface to certain extent and as a con- sequence exhibit higher N%, wetting time, K/S, ZI and UPF values, along with lower WI value compared with other additive. The extent of natural coloration of the treated samples is governed by type active ingredient: Ascorbic acid N salicylic acid, as well as kind of ﬁnishing regime: ester →
Fig. 5. SEM and EDX spectra of untreated linen cellulose (100%) (a & b), treated with citric acid and ascorbic acid (c & d), treated with citric acid, ascorbic acid and nano silicone (e & f).
ether-cross linking most probably due to dehydration of CA, these resulting in the formation of unsaturated acid during the microwave ﬁxation step [47].
3.4.SEM image and EDX spectra
The surface morphology of untreated linen, Fig. 4(a & b), linen cellulose treated with ascorbic acid/DMDHEU, Fig. 5(c & d), or ascorbic acid/CA Fig. 5(c & d), as well as with ascorbic acid/DMDHEU/nano-silicone, Fig. 4(e & f), or ascorbic acid/CA/nano-silicone, Fig. 5(e & f), were evaluated by SEM images. It was observed that the extent of surface deposits formation follows the decreasing order: treatment in the presence of nano-
silicone N treatment in the absence of nano-silicone ≫ untreated, irrespective of the used crosslinker. On the other hand the thickness of the deposited
layer is governed by type of crosslinker and follows the decreasing order: DMDHEU N CA, keeping other parameters ﬁxed.
Moreover, EDX spectra, Fig. 4(e & f), and, Fig. 5(e & f), conﬁrm the existence of Si-element on the treated fabrics surfaces.
3.5.Durability to wash
As far as the change in the performance, color and functional properties of selected ﬁnished fabric samples as a function of washing cycles, the data in Table 4 demonstrate that increasing the washing cycles from one to ten brings about a slight improvement in wettability and degree of whiteness along with a marginal decrease in %N, K/S, antibacterial functionality, ZI, and UV-blocking property, UPF, of the washed fabric samples. The extent of variation in the aforementioned properties is governed by type of ﬁnishing agent, kind of active ingredient as well as the other additive, which in turn affect the extent of ﬁxation and immobilization of the used active ingredients onto/within the linen cellulose structure and their subsequent extent of removal.
Table 4
Durability to wash.
Additionally, the highly retained functional properties even after 10 washing cycles conﬁrms the remarkable ﬁxation and loading of the used ac- tive ingredients onto/within the ﬁnish/fabric matrix.
4.Conclusion
This study presented a facile and environmentally friendly approach for multifunctionalization and natural coloration of linen cellulose sam- ples via incorporation of certain active ingredients in the ether- or ester- crosslinking formulations, using pad-dry/microwave ﬁxation technique. Consequently, the linen fabric samples treated with DMDHEU/ MgCl2·6H2O/active ingredients or with CA/SHP/active ingredients for- mulations revealed a remarkable improvement  in antibacterial  activity, a reasonable enhancement in the UV-protection functionality, a notice- able decrease in degree of whiteness along with a noticeable increase in degree of coloration, and a sharp decrease in wettability of the treated fabric samples. The change in the aforementioned performance and functional properties was governed by type and concentration of active ingredient, mode of ﬁxation and type of ﬁnishing formulation (ether or ester-crosslinking). Incorporation of PEG-400 or nano-silicone softener along with other ingredients, i.e. crosslinker and active ingredient, was accompanied by a noticeable variation in the imparted functional prop- erties as well as extent of coloration. Among the studied active ingredi- ents, ascorbic acid and salicylic acid proved to be the proper ones for attaining the desired protection properties. Both the SEM and EDX spec- tra of the treated fabric samples in the presence of the used nano- silicone softener along with the crosslinking agent and ascorbic acid conﬁrmed a clear surface deposition of the used active ingredient along with the existence of the loaded Si-element during the microwave ﬁxation step. The imparted antibacterial and UV-protection functional- ities were well retained even after 10 washing cycles.
