<title>Radiology in the Era of Value-based Healthcare: A Multi- Society Expert Statement from the ACR, CAR, ESR, IS3R, RANZCR, and RSNA</title>
<author>Adrian P. Brady • Jaqueline A. Bello • Lorenzo E. Derchi • Michael Fuchsjäger • Stacy Goergen • Gabriel P. Krestin • Emil J. Y. Lee • David C. Levin† • Josephine Pressacco • Vijay M. Rao • John Slavotinek • Jacob J. Visser •
Richard E. A. Walker • James A. Brink</author>
<Affiliation>From Mercy University Hospital, Grenville Place, Centre, Cork, T12 WE28, Ireland (A.P.B.); European Society of Radiology (ESR), Vienna, Austria (A.P.B., L.E.D., M.F.); Montefiore Medical Center, New York, NY (J. Bello); American College of Radiology (ACR), Reston, Va (J. Bello, J. Brink); University of Genoa, Genoa Italy (L.E.D.); Medi- cal University Graz, Graz, Austria (M.F.); Monash University, Melbourne, Australia (S.G.); Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists (RANZCR), Sydney, Australia (S.G., J.S.); Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands (G.P.K., J.J.V., J. Brink); International Society for Strategic Studies in Radiology (IS3R), Vienna, Austria (G.P.K., J.J.V.); Langley Memorial Hospital, Langley, Canada (E.J.Y.L.); Canadian Association of Radiologists (CAR), Ottawa, Canada (E.J.Y.L., J.P., R.E.A.W.); ftomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pa (D.C.L.†, V.M.R.); Radiological Society of North America (RSNA), Oak Brook, Ill (D.C.L.†, V.M.R.); McGill University, Mon- treal, Canada (J.P.); Canadian Association of Radiologists (CAR), Ottawa, Canada (E.J.Y.L., J.P., R.E.A.W.); Flinders Medical Centre and Flinders University, Adelaide, Aus- tralia (J.S.); University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada (R.E.A.W.); Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass (J. Brink). Address correspondence to A.P.B. (adrianbrady@me.com).
†Deceased.</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiography</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1148/radiol.202020902</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.202020902</URL>
Background: fte Value-Based Healthcare (VBH) concept is designed to improve individual healthcare outcomes without increasing expenditure, and is increasingly being used to determine resourcing of and reimbursement for medical services. Radiology is a major contributor to patient and societal healthcare at many levels. Despite this, some VBH models do not acknowledge radiology’s central role; this may have future negative consequences for resource allocation.
Methods, findings and interpretation: ftis multi-society paper, representing the views of Radiology Societies in Europe, the USA, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, describes the place of radiology in VBH models and the health-care value contributions of radiology.
Potential steps to objectify and quantify the value contributed by radiology to healthcare are outlined.
n September 2020, members of this writing group pub- lished an article in JAMA on Radiology and Value-Based Healthcare (1), intended to raise awareness among non-ra- diologists of the value contributed to healthcare by radiol- ogy, and of ways that value can be harnessed and enhanced by those who utilise and those who deliver radiology ser- vices. ftis paper expands on that publication, in order to further explore the issues surrounding value-based health- care as they involve radiology, and is primarily aimed at a radiology readership.
Value-based healthcare (VBH) has emerged in recent years as a framework for improving individual patient health outcomes per unit of expenditure (2, 3). fte impe- tus for this is, at least in part, the inexorable worldwide rise in healthcare usage volume and associated costs, increasing at a rate substantially greater than other cost-of-living infla- tion. fte thrust of the VBH concept is to continue to im- prove individual health outcomes without commensurate increasing expenditure, by focusing on identification of practices that optimise the ratio between health gained and healthcare cost. fte goal is to ensure that inflation does not make current healthcare systems unsustainable, while maintaining or continually improving patient outcomes.
US medical service funding is already influenced by tra- ditional cost-effectiveness analyses (CEA) and the more re- cent VBH concept, as well as the related, but not necessar- ily aligned, value-based payment (VBP) models (4). CEA
focuses on a single metric (incremental cost effectiveness ratio, ICER) and is commonly used by policymakers to in- form population—level decisions about which procedures, pharmaceuticals or devices will be funded or subsidised. “Value” in the context of VBH, on the other hand, focuses on what is of value to the individual during a particular ep- isode of care and its immediate aftermath. Consequently, it remains less well-defined, with a wide range of proposed metrics. ftese patient-centred metrics are, in turn, not necessarily aligned with VBPs (e.g. US Medicare and Med- icaid Value-Based Payment Modifier), which often focus on short-term costs to a specific payer of an episode of care. Criticisms of such systems revolve around their inability to accurately measure important patient outcomes and their potential to exacerbate existing disparities in care delivery without improving physician performance of healthcare delivery (5).
fte European Commission Expert Panel on Effective Ways of Investing in Health has recently published a draft Opinion Paper on “Defining Value in ‘value-based health- care’”, which seeks to move the discussion away from value-based pricing to a broader definition of VBH, based on four pillars:
•appropriate care to achieve patients’ personal goals (personal value)
•achievement of best possible outcomes with avail- able resources (technical value)
Key Points
n Value-based healthcare (VBH) is a framework for improving indi- vidual patient health outcomes per unit of expenditure.
n Radiology is a key component of healthcare, impacting greatly on patient outcomes, and must be considered a vital element of VBH.
n Embracing VBH principles, radiology can contribute to moving to a value-driven system, where all investigations or interventions contribute positively to patient outcomes.
•equitable resource distribution across all patient groups (allocative value)
•contribution of healthcare to social participation and connectedness (societal value) (6)
Whatever the source of funding in any individual coun- try, it is likely that healthcare institutions will be obliged in  the future to demonstrate that they apply VBH  principles and optimise resource utilisation in order to ensure  con- tinued funding. fterefore, not only is VBH a sensible ap- proach  to guide critical assessment of practices; it also will    be key  to  services  maintaining  future financial  viability.  ftis paper, written by representatives of the European Society of Radiology (ESR), American College of Radiology (ACR), Ra- diological Society of North America (RSNA), Canadian Associa- tion of Radiologists (CAR), Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists (RANZCR) and International Society for Strategic Studies in Radiology (IS3R), seeks to outline the value contributed to healthcare by radiology, and to explain how that value may be measured, recognised and augmented.
Value Based Healthcare Models	                              Porter’s original description of a VBH model listed an out- come measure hierarchy containing three tiers (Sustainability
of Health, Process of Recovery & Health Status achieved or retained), with many factors contributing to each tier. fte top tier (Sustainability) is considered the most important, with lower-tier outcomes involving results contingent on higher-tier success (8). In his 2010 NEJM paper outlining this model, Porter acknowledged that medical care “involves multiple medical specialties and numerous interventions”, and that “[m]uch of the total cost of caring for a patient involves shared resources, such as physicians, staff, facilities, and equipment” (7). When calculations of value are used as a basis for resourc- ing or reward, conflicts can develop between different groups of contributors to care (1). Porter writes: “in a well-functioning health care system, the creation of value for patients should determine the rewards for all other actors in the system” (7).
Radiology is a vital part of modern medicine, a significant positive contributor to patient diagnosis and continuing care, and thus a key component of provision of value. Furthermore, radiology as a specialty is the perfect example of a healthcare resource shared across all levels of healthcare delivery, all medical specialties, and patient care at all ages (1). Diagnostic radiology contributes value in clinical workup by refining differential diag- noses formulated from history- taking, physical examination and sometimes laboratory test results, thereby decreasing the time re- quired to initiate appropriate treatment, ultimately helping to
reduce patient morbidity and mortality (8, 9). In Porter’s VBH model, health gains and reduced costs associated with decreased time in hospital, improved survival and lower utilisation of inef- fective treatments and investigations are not recognised as contri- butions made by radiology to the value of healthcare. Nonethe- less, short-term expenditures on imaging may create long-term and system-wide cost savings and better patient outcomes, none of which are credited to the value of radiology according to this model.
One extreme interpretation of the VBH model con-siders diagnostic radiology as a “cost centre”, whereby all expenditures on imaging are perceived to negatively contribute to value in healthcare, in the context of the influence of errors or complica- tions negatively affecting outcomes in the Process of Recovery tier. Errors happen in radiology, as they do in all branches of medicine, but many reports of errors in radiology misunderstand the diagnostic process, and apply biases to interpretation after the fact, rather than reflecting the reality of interpretation of im- aging data at a specific time, often based on limited background information (3, 10). ftis extreme view values radiology’s contri- butions (if at all) in much the same way as laboratory investiga- tion outputs, ignoring much of the value created by the practice of radiology, and radiology’s clinical centrality to patient care.
Radiology’s Place in Value Based Healthcare Models
How, then, can we ensure that radiology is appreciated not as a potential source of loss of value, but rather as an intrinsic value creator?
fte most important way to do this is to quantify radiology’s impact on patient outcomes and on measurements used histori- cally by policymakers and other third party payers, such as Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) and ICERs. In 1991 Fryback and ftornbury proposed a 6-level hierarchical value model starting with evidence of technical efficacy at the lowest level and ending with societal efficacy at the highest level (11) (Fig. 1). It is generally considered that adding value to patient care only starts at level 4. However, much scientific literature relating to diagnostic radiol- ogy (as opposed to image-guided therapy) relates to image acqui- sition and diagnostic accuracy, at levels 1 and 2, rather than to the contribution of radiology, in concert with the entire system of delivery of care, to the health outcomes of the patient or society as a whole (the higher hierarchical levels). For instance, a high qual- ity MRI performed on well—maintained equipment by a highly trained radiologist for a previously well 42— year old patient re- porting two weeks of non-specific low back pain (effective at levels 1 & 2) may provide less net benefit to individual or societal health than an average quality head CT for a 25 year old painter who fell from a ladder and has a high pre-test clinical risk of intracranial injury (effective at levels 3–6) (11).
Diagnostic Radiology faces special challenges in demonstrat- ing a link between its key output, (making or changing a diag- nosis), and the final step in the value chain, (improved health of the patient), due to the many confounders along the pathway between diagnosis and outcome.
Pathways exist for radiology providers to demonstrate mean- ingful contributions to patient health outcomes, or to have their funding/reimbursement influenced by value- based activity. fte US Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA) established the Quality Payment Program, un- der which eligible clinicians can participate via one of two tracks: Advanced Alternative Pay- ment Models (APMs); or the Merit- based In- centive Payment System (MIPS). Both tracks involve quality measures that demonstrate participation in certain quality improvement activities as well as contributions of radiology activity to patient care (12).
Considering the issues underpinning radi- ology value is not a new idea. In 2009, Gun- derman & Boland elegantly outlined some of the reasons physicians or patients might choose to use one radiology service over another (per- ceived relative value), and some of the ques- tions radiologists might ask themselves when considering the value they provide to patients (13). In 2011, Rao & Levin explained the value-based benefits to patients of single, co- hesive, on-site radiology groups in hospitals, as
opposed to fragmented or out-sourced imag-
Figure: Hierarchical value model. (Reproduced with permission from Raja UA, Patel S, Singh LK, Shah D, Hamdulay S, Penn H, Remedios D. Early arthritis ultrasound: a 4-year outcome study. ECR 2014, EPOS, https://doi.org/10.1594/ecr2014/C-2059)
ing services (14). Also in 2011, Gazelle et al. (15) proposed a frame-work to assess the value of diagnostic imaging in the era of comparative effectiveness research. In 2016 Seidel et al. (16) described specific strategies for diagnostic imaging to generate evidence and value.
Nobody in modern medical practice could imagine attempt- ing to function and maintain standards of clinical service in the absence of diagnostic imaging services, including specialist radi- ologist interpretation, consultation and intervention. Radiology is a deeply-embedded and essential part of modern patient care, at all levels of service delivery and complexity, encompassing high-level hospital-based medicine, primary care investigation, screening and health-promotion activities. “Few episodes of care occur without medical imaging, and a rational health care sys- tem should define the distribution of revenue to radiology based on its value as derived from quality and costs” (17).
Radiology departments have the potential to be bottle- necks in any healthcare environment. A secondary analysis of the US National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NHAMCS) from 2006 through 2008 demonstrated that when a physician ordered an ultrasound, CT, or MRI during an emer- gency department visit, the average length of stay for that pa- tient increased by 56, 59, and 64 min respectively (18). Under- resourced hospital-based services can delay patient throughput and dis-charge. Under-resourced primary-care and out-patient access to imaging limits the capacity of non-hospital-based services to manage patients, resulting in increased reliance on more expensive hospital-based facilities. Adequate resourcing  of radiology is vital to achieving or maintaining healthcare ef- ficiency, and thus to maximising value. fterefore, as part of the fundamental goal of enhancement of value for patients, radiol- ogy must be a component of any formula to assess costs against out-comes in healthcare.
Value Equation	                                                                Relating technical quality, service quality and price has been de- fined as the radiology “value equation” (19). What constitutes
value in healthcare depends upon who you ask. fte University of Utah Health surveyed patients, physicians and employers who pay for medical benefits, in an effort to define how they perceive value. Each group prioritised different value statements, reflecting the different viewpoints of those who deliver a ser-vice, those who receive it and those who pay for it (20). ftis led the authors to propose a shift from the original Porter equation (Value = Outcome/Cost) to a more-nuanced one, identifying service as a specific component (Value = Quality + Service/Cost). Quality may incorporate elements such as employee productiv- ity (for employers) that matter little to other groups. Service may include elements such as out-of-pocket expenses (for patients) that are not prime considerations for physicians or employers.
Value exists as a concept only in the eyes of the recipient.  In economic terms, it can be considered as the total amount of money a customer would be willing to pay for a service. Value creation involves providing new services or improving existing services to increase their worth to the recipient, at little or no additional cost (19).
Where Is the Value of Radiology Delivered?
a)Prevention
a.Disease prevention (screening and predictive im- aging biomarkers)
b.Reassurance, e.g. confirmation of the absence of disease, eliminating the need for further (poten- tially-expensive) investigation
c.Radiation protection – optimising protocols to minimise risk, preventing unnecessary or dupli- cate studies.
b)Detection
a.Population-based screening programs
b.Identification of abnormalities accounting for clinical presentations
c)Diagnosis
a.Disease staging, facilitating decisions about appro- priate management
b.Provision of high-level subspecialist imaging inter- pretation, shown to improve staging and manage- ment decision-making (21)
c.Image-guided lesion biopsy for histopathology
d.Clinical decision-support – facilitating the choice of the most-helpful and most-targeted investiga- tion to answer a clinical question and indicating clinical situations in which imaging is likely to represent low-value care.
d)Delivery and monitoring of therapy
a.Evaluation of patient progress during  treat- ment; early treatment monitoring (responders vs. non-responders)
b.Development & utilisation of imaging biomark- ers, to facilitate earlier disease detection, pre- diction of response to treatment, reduction in invasive testing and improvements in targeted treatments. Imaging biomarkers add value to pre- treatment workup, treatment choice and follow- up for many conditions. Biomarkers can act as surrogate endpoints in clinical trials, leading to more rapid translation of research to clinical prac- tice (22).
c.Interventional radiology – minimally-invasive investigations and treatments, often resulting in speedier recovery than after formal surgery
e)Prognosis
a.Confirmation of disease resolution, facilitating cessation of treatment
f)Other
a.Teleradiology linking rural communities and highly specialised radiology centres/hospitals
b.Other non-interpretive activities, e.g. teaching, multi-disciplinary team meeting preparation and participation, research and administrative work (23)
c.Communication to patients, the public, the medical community and other interested stake- holders. ftis includes critical test result notifi- cations to ensure timely clinical handover and emergency care (1).
How Is Value Measured?	 Impacting therapeutic decisions, improving patient out-comes and benefits for society as a whole are the core aspects of value
creation in radiology. Quantifying radiology’s impact requires more precise, reproducible, and practically-measurable imag- ing-specific and clinically-relevant metrics linked to agreed and important health outcomes. Future radiology research must place  greater  emphasis  on  Fryback  and  ftornbury’s higher-
level out-comes (11) to best demonstrate radiology’s value. While a diagnostic test such as breast MRI, performed using the same equipment, scanning parameters, and interpreter, may have equivalent diagnostic performance in two different patient groups, its efficacy will likely be greater in women with specific characteristics (e.g. BRCA1 mutation carriage).
To Whom Is the Value of Radiology Delivered? Ultimately, the recipient of healthcare services (and value) is the patient, and, to some extent, their loved ones. However, except
in the context of screening, requests for diagnostic radiology studies usually come from referring clinicians who seek radiol- ogy’s input, and directly receive the output (reports). Referring clinicians can be considered as “intermediate customers”. When optimally utilised, the value of radiology is also delivered to hos- pitals and health services and to the economy as a whole (1).
Patients do not want an ultrasound, CT, or MRI; they want an answer to a clinical question. fte primary purpose of diagnostic radiology is to answer clinical questions using medical imaging, and to help guide patient care in the most effective way possible, including in some instances not performing an imaging test (1). Fundamentally, diagnostic radiology is concerned with acquisi- tion, utilisation, and dissemination of information (1). Process metrics can be used to measure aspects of value delivery includ- ing timeliness of information delivery, application of appropriate levels of specialisation to interpretation (and thus to accuracy of information acquisition), and tailoring of information delivery to the needs of different types of intermediate customers (e.g. emer- gency care, primary care, non-urgent specialty care) (19).
What Is the Goal?	 Radiology is a key component of healthcare, impacting greatly on patient outcomes, and must be considered a vital element
of VBH. Radiology must be part of any calculation of value metrics, and resourcing decisions based on such calculations must take account of the need to resource radiology adequately to maintain its value contribution (15).
Radiologists and radiology departments have a responsibility to help define and create value wherever possible and to optimise the yield from what we do. In addition, we need to publish re- search reporting on radiology’s impact on therapeutic decisions, patient outcomes, and societal benefits, especially when targeting select patient populations for new medical imaging applications, when associated healthcare costs may be large (15). Traditional radiology research metrics like diagnostic and technical accuracy may be sufficient to demonstrate a value contribution for tests and procedures with smaller, well-defined target populations and/or clear impacts on patient outcome (15). When assessing the societal value of radiology, we need different robust, repro- ducible, and clinically relevant outcome metrics to objectify and quantify the value contributed by radiology (24).
Steps which can support this endeavour include:
1.Engaging directly and often with referring clinicians to better understand their practices and needs, and to de- velop mutual relationships of trust and under-standing.
a.Supporting evidence-based guidelines to assist referrers in requesting appropriate imaging or interventional procedures specific to the patient’s clinical history or condition (e.g., ESR iGuide, ACR Appropriateness Criteria, Choosing Wisely) (25–28).
b.Reinforcing the use of such guidelines in collabo- ration with referrers enhances the quality of pa- tient care and enables radiologists to con-tribute value through efficacious resource use.
2.Understanding the varying needs of referrers (e.g. rapid turnaround, 24/7 availability for emergency care, sub- specialty expertise, multidisciplinary input for complex, non-emergency cases), and building services to encom- pass all needs without conflict (1).
3.Ensuring that radiology departments work cohesively as a whole, operating as teams to ensure enterprise-wide standards are achieved, cross-cover and -sup-port are freely available, and isolated silos do not develop to the detriment of other areas of service.
4.Structuring department work plans to meet referrers’ needs, e.g. making protected time available for multi- disciplinary team activity.
5.Utilising available resources and tools (e.g. structured reporting, clinical decision support tools, AI tools) and, where possible, augmenting resources to optimise work- flow to minimise patient waiting times for studies, and (if achievable) shorten hospital stays
6.Engaging directly with patients, to answer their ques- tions and offer explanation of their imaging findings, as appropriate (1).
7.Optimising information (images, reports etc.) exchange using appropriate IT tools, e.g. provision of urgent re- port notifications, clinical decision support tools and use of structured reporting, including links to key images demonstrating positive findings (29).
8.Constant quality monitoring and promotion of a culture of constant quality improvement (19).
9.Experimental research, including efforts to establish higher-level value contributions: supporting today’s ra- diology research is a commitment to improving tomor- row’s radiology practice (30).
ftese principles are inherent to several value-based imaging initiatives, including the ACR’s Imaging 3.0 (31), the RSNA’s Radiology Cares (32), and the RANZCR’s Inside Radiology (33). Optimisation of value-creation and resource utilisation demands cooperation among all those involved, including re- ferrers, patients, health-care administrators, and radiologists. Patients must understand that their specific needs are best served by a flexible, responsive healthcare system that applies the investigation best suited to answering the relevant clinical question at that particular point in their care, with the great- est safety. Referrers must work with radiologists to optimise resource utilisation, justified and optimised to the specific pa- tient’s circumstance at the time, in order to maximise value. All parties must educate themselves about methodologies used to determine costs and value, and must understand that their choice of actions and decisions may have influences that go far beyond the narrow specifics of any one episode of patient care
or siloed departmental or hospital budgets. Cost calculation and allocation is complex and relative, depending on the refer- ence points used (17).
Conclusion	 VBH as a concept is here to stay. It will underpin future plan- ning and resource allocation in all aspects of medical care.
Models of defining value remain in evolution. Nar-row models which commence the consideration of value with the making of a diagnosis are incomplete, and mis-represent the entire healthcare resource allocation for that patient. Radiology’s con- tribution to healthcare is broad, encompassing many aspects that go beyond traditional study report creation. Objectifying this contribution by stating the impact on therapeutic deci- sions, patient out-comes, and societal benefits ensures radiolo- gists’ future role. Radiologists, working singly or as parts of collective departments, must understand the principles un- derpinning cost allocation and the value-chain concept, and must take VBH into account when planning, developing and delivering their services. Equally, referrers, who impose costs without incurring them directly (by utilising services which are paid for by patients or third party payers) must have greater accountability for their impact on the cost of medi-  cal imaging and for ensuring resources are utilised for opti- mum patient health benefit. Managers who resource and plan healthcare services must understand  how  under-resourcing of potential bottlenecks in service delivery, such as radiology facilities, can impact negatively on outcomes for patients. By embracing VBH principles, and striving to create value where possible, radiology can contribute greatly to moving from a volume-driven system to a value-driven one, where as many investigations or interventions as possible contribute positively to patient outcomes (1). ftis will require renewed willingness on the part of radi-ologists to participate in team-based clini- cal decision-making with other specialists. It will also require willingness on the part of referrers to work with radiologists to ensure the most appropriate use of radiology resources, services and personnel (1).
Acknowledgements: ftis paper was endorsed in September 2020 by the govern- ing bodies of the American College of Radiology, the Canadian Association of Ra- diologists, the European Society of Radiology, the International Society of Strategic Studies in Radiology, the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiolo- gists, and the Radiological Society of North America.
ftis article is co-published in Insights into Imaging (doi: 10.1186/ s13244-020-00941-z), the Canadian Association of Radiologists Journal (doi: 10.1177/0846537120982567), the Journal of Medical Imaging and Radiation Oncology (doi: 10.1111/1754-9485.13125), the Journal  of  the  American  Col-  lege of Radiology (doi: 10.1016/j.jacr.2020.12.003), and Radiology (doi: 10.1148/ radiol.2020209027).
Disclaimer: fte governing bodies of the affiliated societies of this article reviewed and endorsed this article. Formal peer review by two independent reviewers was car- ried out in the Journal of Medical Imaging and Radiation Oncology; no further peer review was carried out in the other co-publishing journals.
Funding: No funding was received for this work.
Ethics approval and consent to participate: Not applicable.
Consent for publication: Not applicable.
