<title>Overtemperature protection systems for spallation target in China initiative accelerator driven sub-critical system</title>
<author>Wenjuan Cui a,b,⇑, Zhiyong He a,⇑, Wenjing Ma a, Kai Yin a,b, Qiang Zhao a, Xueying Zhang a, Zhiqiang Chen a</author>
<Affiliation>a Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou, China
b School of Nuclear Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2019.01.028</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2019.01.028  </URL>
ABSTRACT
In an accelerator driven sub-critical system (ADS), a spallation target is irradiated by high-power proton beam to drive a sub-critical reactor. To continuously produce very intense neutrons, it is very important to prevent the unsafe operation of the target. This paper reports an over-temperature protection system for the spallation target in China initiative ADS system, where tungsten granules in the target container are used as both coolant and target materials. In order to protect the target from abnormal irradiation by the accelerator’s beam when the granules are blocked or when the beam deviates from the target center, 12 sets of thermocouples are mounted inside the target container to monitor the target temperature. To evaluate the protection functions of these thermocouples, the heat transfer model of particles has been employed to investigate the spatio-temporal variations of the target temperatures when tungsten gran- ules stay static in the target. The simulation results indicate that the temperatures of the thermocouples increase with the irradiation time and the granular blockage can be detected by analyzing the tempera- tures of these thermocouples. On the other hand, when the beam center deviates from the target center, the azimuthal distribution of the target temperature becomes non-uniform, and the temperature of the thermocouple close to the beam center increases faster. Finally, in the monitoring system for the over- temperature protection, 12 thermocouples divided into 3 groups which are fixed within the target in the upper, central and lower parts of the target, and 4 thermocouples in each group are located in four directions of east, south, west, and north. If two or more channels of four directions in one group exceed the set point, the protective function of granular blockage will be initiated; if two or more channels in one direction are greater than the set point, the protective function of beam deviation will be triggered.
Keywords:
Accelerator-Driven System Granular spallation target Overtemperature protection Heat transfer
1.Introduction
Accelerator driven critical or sub-critical systems (ADS) may be employed to address several missions (Abderrahim et al., 2010), including transmuting selected isotopes present in nuclear waste to reduce the burden isotopes on geologic repositories; generating electricity and/or process heat; producing fissile materials for sub- sequent use in critical or sub-critical systems by irradiating fertile elements. Currently there are active programs in many countries to develop, demonstrate and exploit ADS technology for nuclear waste transmutation and power generation. In China, driven  by the national demand for safe disposal of nuclear waste as well as the potentials for advanced power generation, China initiative Accelerator Driven sub-critical System (CiADS) initiated by the Chi-nese Academy of Sciences in 2011 under the frame of ‘‘Strategic Priority Research Program” has been approved in January 2018 to build in Guangdong province.
In an ADS system, external spallation neutrons produced by a spallation target is used to drive a sub-critical reactor. In order to provide the ADS system with a very intense external neutron source, the high-power spallation target is irradiated by a very intense proton beam with high beam energy and high beam inten- sity. An efficient target coolant system has to be used to remove the deposited heat from the beam-target interaction zone. On the other hand, in order to successfully couple the three components in the ADS system, an accelerator, a target and a reactor, it is very important to design an overall instrumentation and control (I&C) system (He et al., 2016; Cui et al., 2016), by integrating the control systems in an accelerator with I&C systems in a reactor, such as the control, monitoring, protection systems in the reactor, and the tim- ing system, machine protection system, personnel protection sys- tem in the accelerator. For example, if an unsafe condition is detected or an accident occurs in a commercial reactor, the reactor protection system opens the reactor trip breakers to remove power from the control rod drive mechanisms, allowing the rods to fall into the reactor core. In contrast, the sub-critical reactor  in  an ADS system is shut down urgently by removing power from the electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) ion source, allowing the accel- erator to urgently shut down its beam.
In this paper, we report the design of the protection system, in particular the overtemperature protection system, for the spalla- tion target in CiADS facility. The overtemperature protection sys- tem is designed to protect the target against from abnormal irradiation with the accelerator’s beam, by initiating a trip if safe temperature limit is exceeded. Two kinds of abnormal irradiations are considered. The first one is the irradiation when the beam devi- ates far from the target centre, and the second one is the irradiation when the coolant system for the target core is abnormal. In the next section, the spallation target used in an ADS system will be described.
2.Spallation target
To demonstrate the ADS concept at 10 MW power level, the proton accelerator in CIADS facility is designed for the energy of 250 MeV and the maximum intensity of 10 mA. During the com- missioning and  operation  of  the  facility,  the  beam  intensity  of  1 mA will be used.
The spallation target is one of the most critical parts for CiADS facility. According to different heavy-metal states, spallation tar- gets can be divided into liquid and solid targets respectively. Sev- eral liquid metals have been used as target materials  (Bauer,  2010; McManamy et al., 2008), such as the mercury and the lead–bismuth eutectic alloy (LBE). The problems with liquid tar- gets are liquid metal corrosion, and cavitation erosion. For LBE tar- get, it is necessary to control the oxygen level for the prevention of wall corrosion. The heat removal from the target window is also limited by the corrosion and erosion.
On the other hand, a critical problem with solid targets is to remove the heat from the beam interaction  zone.  In  (Bauer,  2010; McManamy et al., 2010; Thomsen et al., 2012); a rotating solid target is considered for heat removal. A rotating target is a target disc supported from underneath and cooled by water or inert helium gas. The support and drive unit is located in a cave beneath the target block, where hands-on maintenance would be	dt
possible. Due to the complicated mechanical configuration in a rotating target system, it is not easy to use it in CiADS facility, where the target is located vertically in the center of the reactor core.
Recently, a new concept of solid targets, the so-called gravity- driven dense granular-flow target (DGT), was proposed for the high-power target in an ADS system (Yang and Zhan,  2015).  A DGT includes many small granules and a cylindrical target con- tainer filled with these granules. Driven by gravity, the granules    in the target container will flow away from the beam interaction region and will be cooled externally using heat exchangers. Bene- fits to the solid phase characteristics, the radiotoxicity and chemi- cal toxicity of the target are lower.
Gravity-driven dense granular flows are common and useful flows in modern industry and natural world. For example, hoppers and silos adopted in agriculture and chemical industry utilize this efficient, economical and reliable flow to make the production pro- cess easy. Another example is the gravity-driven dense pebble flow in high temperature gas-cooled reactor (HTGR) in nuclear engi- neering. The core of a HTGR is a packed pebble bed of random and  dense  packing consisting  of mono-sized spherical pebbles. In	n	3
the HTGR core, heat generated from the nuclear fission reaction and decay heat from fission products inside the fuel spheres are removed by the forced circulation of the pressurized coolant helium gas (Gao and Shi, 2002; Wu et al., 2002). The elevated static pressure and the large pebble diameter lead to high values of the Reynolds number. All these mature technologies in chemical and nuclear engineering for conveying, filtering and cooling granules can be used in the DGT target.
The core of the DGT target in CiADS facility is filled with many small tungsten granules. To avoid a vacuum among these granules, helium gas with a very low pressure of only 0.05 MPa is chosen as filled gas because helium is both chemically and radiologically inert and, does not undergo a phase change. In addition, it is natu- rally available in sufficient quantities. Since the relative velocity between the gas and granule is very small, the low static pressure of gas leads to a very small value of the Reynolds number.
3.Numerical model
Prior to the design of the overtemperature protection system for the spallation target, the temperature profile of the target is ana- lyzed with simulations. Granular flows are  common  and  there  are mature technologies for simulating particle motion and heat transfer. For particle motion, the discrete element method (DEM) now is accepted as an effective model for simulation. For heat transfer, the heat transfer model for packed pebble beds in high temperature gas-cooled nuclear reactors is used in the heat trans- fer of the granules.
3.1.DEM (discrete element method) model
Various approaches have been proposed to implement DEM model. The most common model is the so-called linear spring– dashpot model proposed by Cundall and Strack  (1979);  where  the spring is used for the elastic deformation while the dashpot accounts for the viscous dissipation. In such an approach, granules are permitted to suffer deformations, and these deformations are used to calculate forces between granules.
According to linear spring–dashpot model, the translational equation for granule i at time t is given as (e.g. Li and Ji, 2013; Zhou et al., 2010; Zhu et al., 2007; Hu et al.,  2017;  Hao  et  al., 2017; Marra et al., 2017):@1
where mi is the mass of granule i, and V is the translational velocity vector at time t. mi g is the gravitational force. Fn,ij and Ft,ij are the normal and tangential contact forces to granule j. Ff,i is the granule-fluid interaction force and is expressed as (Hao et al., 2017):@2
where uf and Vp are the fluid velocity and the granule velocity, respectively. cpf is a fluid-granule interaction coefficient. The nor- mal and tangential contact forces are expressed as:@3
@4
where kn and kt, cn and ct, Vn,ij and Vt,ij, dn,ij and dt,ij are elastic con- stant, viscoelastic damping constant, the relative velocity, deforma- tions in the normal and tangential directions, respectively. The elastic and viscoelastic damping constants are formulated as
@5
@6
@7
@8
where b is the damping coefficient. E*, G*, R* and m* are equivalent values of the Young’s modulus, shear modulus, radius and mass,which are given by
@9
@10
@11
@12
where v is the Poisson ratio of the granule material. The damping coefficient can be obtained from
@14
where mi, Ci and Ti are the granule mass, specific heat and temper- ature of granule i. qc,ij is the heat conduction flux to granule j and n is the number of granules in contact with granule i. qr,ik is the ther- mal radiation flux to granule k and m is the number of granules con- nected to granule i by thermal radiation. qf,i and qs,i are the heat flux by fluid convection and the heat source term.
For granule heat conduction, the heat flux between two gran- ules in contact is calculated as @15
where ki and kj are thermal conductivities of granules i and j. Ac,ij is the contact area between the pair. In general, the contact between two granules is not at  a single point but on  a finite  area due to  the deformation of the granules. For two balls with a radius of R,is calculated as
@16
where dn,ij is the deformation in the normal directions. In the simu- lation, we have used both the thermal conductivity and specific heat of tungsten reported in Fukuda et al. (2018), where the thermal conductivity of tungsten decreases with temperature and its speci- fic heat increases with temperature.
The radiation flux between two granules that are far away from each other is very low. Therefore, in current radiation model, only the neighboring Voronoi pairs very close to each other are consid- ered for granule radiation. The heat flux between two neighboring granules is formulated as
@17
where ei, ei and Ai, Ak are surface emissivity and area of granule i and granule k. Vi,k is the modified view factor by considering the non-closed cavity and the effect of solid conductivity. The surface emis- sivity for the normal tungsten is given by (Takamura et al., 2013) empirically as follows:
@18
For fluid-granule convection in a cell, the heat flux is expressed as
@19
where Ap is surface area of the granule and h is heat convection coefficient which is basically given as@20
@21
@22
where Nu, Rep and Pr are the Nusselt number, granule Reynolds number and Prandtl number; dp and kf are granule diameter and fluid     conductivity,     respectively.     The      fluid      conductivity  kf = 0.0242 W/(m K) for the packed pebble bed (Hao et al., 2017). C; a and b are constants for the particular geometrical structure.
qf and mf are the density of fluid and dynamic viscosity of the fluid. In the case where tungsten granules are blocked in the target con-
tainer, there are |uf — Vp| = 0 and Nu = 2.
3.3.Energy deposition for heat source term
When high energy protons irradiate the heavy metal target, spallation reactions occur, producing secondary particles, light nuclei, fission products and also recoiling nuclei. The kinetic ener- gies of these particles and the recoiling nuclei heat up the nucleus, resulting in energy deposition in the spallation target. Based on GEANT4 codes, we have performed the simulations about energy deposition of a DGT irradiated by a 250-MeV proton beam (Zhao  et al., 2018a,b). The simulation results have been used in the fol- lowing calculations of the target temperatures.
4.Simulation results and analysis
Simulations have been performed for a cylindrical target with a radius of 120 mm. The target filled with tungsten granules of radius 2 mm is located vertically at the centre of a sub-critical core and is bombarded vertically by  protons  with  beam  energy  of  250 MeV. As shown in Fig. 1, the vertical coordinate is taken as   the z-axis and the top surface of the tungsten granules is taken      as the coordinate origin.
In the simulation, the temperatures at four locations have been observed: locations  A  (x = 80 mm,  y = 0,  z = 100 mm),  B  (x = 0,  y = 80 mm, z = 100 mm), C (x = 80 mm, y = 0, z = 100 mm), and D (x = 0, y = 80 mm, z = 100 mm). The beam centre is fixed at loca- tion E. According to the preliminary design of CiADS facility, the inlet temperature of tungsten granules into the target is 523 K. Thus, the temperature of each granule is  initialized as  523 K  in the simulation.
4.1.Without beam scanning
In the case without beam scanning, the beam centre is fixed at location E (xb, yb) in Fig. 1. When xb = 0 and yb = 0, the beam centre is fixed at the target center. Fig. 2 shows the spatial distribution of target temperature at z = 100 mm along x axis from x =  120 mm  to x = 120 mm for a tungsten target bombarded by 250 MeV pro-
Fig. 1. The cylindrical target model in the simulation.
tons with a FWHM (full width at half maximum) of 50 mm, where the tungsten granules stay static for 5 s in the target container. The solid line represents the temperatures of the target when the beam center is located at the target center. The temperatures at locations A and C, TA and TC, are equal. However, as shown by the dashed line in Fig. 2, when the beam center moves to xb = 50 mm and yb = 0 - mm, the temperature TA rises; while the temperature TC does not change.
Fig. 3 shows the temperature at location A, TA, as a function of the irradiation time by a 250-MeV proton beam with a beam inten- sity of 1 mA, where the temperatures with three beam centers,     xb = 30, 40, and 50 mm, are compared. It can be seen clearly that the temperature increases with the irradiation time. When the beam center locates at xb = 50 mm, the temperature at location A increases with the time from 523 K to 635 K at 4 s and 723 K at      6 s, respectively.
The temperatures at locations A, B and C as a function of the irradiation time by protons with a beam intensity of 1 mA are shown in Fig. 4. The temperature at locations D which is equal to
Fig. 3. Temperature at location A as a function of the irradiation time by a 250-MeV proton beam with an FWHM of 50 mm and an intensity of 1 mA. Three  beam centers, xb = 30, 40, and 50 mm, are considered.
Fig. 2. Target temperature at y = 0 and z = 100 mm along x-axis. 250-MeV proton beam with an FWHM of 50 mm and an intensity of 1 mA impinging on tungsten target. TA and TC represent the temperatures at locations A and C, respectively.
Fig. 4.  Temperatures at locations A, B and C as a function of the irradiation time by a 250-MeV proton beam with an FWHM of 50 mm and an intensity of 1 mA. The beam center locates at xb = 45 mm and yb = 35 mm.
the temperature at locations C is not shown in the figure. Because the beam center is located in quadrant I, we have that TA/TC > 1 and TB/TD > 1. Thus, one can estimate which quadrant the beam centre locates from the following ratios:@23
@24
where t is the irradiation time, and TA(t), TB(t), TC(t), and TD(t) are
the temperatures at time t at locations A, B, C, and D, respectively. Table 1 lists the values of two ratios RAC and RBD when the beam center is located at different quadrants. For example, with the mea- sured values of both RAC > 1 and RBD > 1, one knows that the beam centre is located at Quadrant I with an azimutal angle range from
u = 0 to u = 90°.
4.2.With beam scanning
In the case with beam scanning, the beam centre moves at a constant rate in the  azimuthal angles between 0 and 360°,  and the radial positions between 5 and 75 mm. A minimum of 5 mm
in the radial positions is used to avoid high rates of energy deposi- tion in the target centre.
Fig. 5 shows the spatial distribution of target temperature at     y = 0 mm  and  z = 100 mm  along   x  axis   from  x =   120 mm  to   x = 120 mm for a tungsten target bombarded by 250 MeV protons with beam scanning, where the tungsten granules move vertically in a speed of 500 mm/s. The maximum temperature within the tar-
Table 1
Temperature ratios in different azimuth angle.
Fig. 5. Target temperature at y = 0 and z = 100 mm along x-axis. The 250-MeV proton beam with the beam intensities of 1 mA or 10 mA bombards the tungsten target with a granular speed of v = 500 mm/s. TA and TC represent the temperatures at locations A and C, respectively.
get increases with the increasing beam intensity. When the beam intensity increases to 10 mA, the maximum temperature attains 760 K. Thus, the granular-flow target in the CiADS facility can oper- ate normally when it is bombarded by the proton beam with the maximum beam intensity of 10 mA.
get increases with the increasing beam intensity. When the beam intensity increases to 10 mA, the maximum temperature attains 760 K. Thus, the granular-flow target in the CiADS facility can oper- ate normally when it is bombarded by the proton beam with the maximum beam intensity of 10 mA.
Fig. 6 shows the spatial distribution of the target temperature at z = 100 mm along x axis from x = 120 mm to x = 120 mm for the tungsten target bombarded by the proton beam with the intensity Fig. 6 shows the spatial distribution of the target temperature at z = 100 mm along x axis from x = 120 mm to x = 120 mm for the tungsten target bombarded by the proton beam with the intensity container. The temperatures at locations A and C, TA and TC, increase simultaneously with the irradiation time. Thus, if the tem- peratures at the four locations, A, B, C and D, increase to a setpoint T0, one knows that the tungsten granules have been blocked within the target container.
The temperatures at location A as a function of the irradiation time for the proton beams with the  beam  intensities  of  0.1,  1  and 10 mA are shown in Fig. 7, where the tungsten granules are
Fig. 6. Target temperature at y = 0 and z = 100 mm along x-axis. 250-MeV proton beam with an intensity of 1 mA bombards the tungsten target, where the granular speed v = 0 mm/s. TA and TC represent the temperatures at locations A and C, respectively.
Fig. 7. Temperature at location A as a function of the irradiation time by a 250-MeV proton beams  with the  intensities of  0.1,  1, or 10 mA,  where the  granular speed      v = 0 mm/s.
static within the target container. The temperature with the inten- sity of 0.1 mA increases more slowly than the temperatures with the intensities of 1 or 10 mA. Thus, in order to avoid very high tem- peratures within the target, a lower intensity of 0.1 mA or less should be used during the commissioning of the target and its coolant system. Only when the target and its coolant system oper- ate  very well, one  increases the  beam intensity from 0.1 mA to      1 mA or 10 mA. Since the inlet temperature of tungsten granules into the target is 523 K, the above-mentioned setpoint T0 can be set to be 623 K. As shown in Fig. 7, it takes 86, 18 and 4 s to attain 623 K for the beam intensities of 0.1, 1 and 10 mA, respectively.
5.Protection and monitoring system
In this section, the design of the overtemperature protection system for the spallation target in CiADS facility is discussed. The purpose of the overtemperature protection system is to prevent any abnormal irradiation of the target from the accelerator’s beam. Two kinds of abnormal irradiations are considered. The first one is the irradiation with an offset beam, and the second one is the irra- diation when the granular flow is blocked within the target con- tainer. As a part of the overall protection  system  in  CiADS   facility, the target’s overtemperature protection system meets the general design criteria of the protection system in a commercial reactor, such as single failure criterion, testability, independence, diversity, and so on.
5.1.Monitoring system
The monitoring system for protecting the target is shown  in Fig. 8. The 12 thermocouples are divided into 3 groups, where each group includes 4 thermocouples. The thermocouples in 3 groups are fixed in the upper, central and lower part of the target, where 4 thermocouples in each group are mounted on the direction ofeast, south, west, and north. The position of these thermocouples should be close to the spallation reaction zone, i.e. the beam-  target interaction zone.
Since the thermocouples within the target will stay in the extre- mely high-radiation environment. Specific thermocouples have to be used, such as K-type thermocouples made of chromel–alumel assemblies which have been used in the temperature measure- ment within the (MEGAWatt Pilot Experiment) MEGAPIE target (Zanini et al., 2008, 2011) and in the core temperature measure- ment in some pressurized water reactors and fast reactors. The MEGAPIE target consisted of a loop of lead–bismuth  eutectic  (LBE) has been irradiated successfully by 575-MeV protons with   a beam intensity of 1.375 mA at the SINQ facility of the Paul Scher- rer Institut. Dozens of K-type thermocouples made of chromel–alu-mel assembly with an operating range between —200 °C and
Fig. 8. Locations of 12 thermocouples in the spallation target. U, C, L denotes the thermocouple in the upper, central and lower locations, respectively. The 12 sets of neutron detectors outside the target container are also shown with the solid circles or solid bars.1200 °C have been mounted within the target container to provide level and temperature measurements. In a 40 MWt sodium-cooled
fast reactor (Sridhara et al., 2018), the temperature of sodium at the outlet of each fuel sub-assembly has been measured with the K-type mineral-insulated-metal-sheathed thermocouples, which have been proven for their excellent stability in the presence of extremely high gamma- and neutron- irradiation. In the pressur- ized water reactors, fixed incore thermocouples, made of chro- mel–alumel, are provided to monitor the outlet temperature  of fuel assemblies.
The temperature monitoring system contains redundant instru- mentation channels (three or four instruments) for each protective function. The purpose of the horizontal four thermocouples in each group provides redundant channels of the two-out-of-four (2oo4) coincidence logic for the protective function of granular blockage. On the other hand, the purpose of the vertical three thermocouples in each direction provides redundant channels of the two-out-of- three (2oo3) coincidence logic for the protective function of offset beam.
Except the above-mentioned 12 thermocouples, 12 sets of neu- tron detectors divided into 3 groups are installed outside the target container in the upper, central and lower parts of the target con- tainer, respectively, where 4 neutron detectors in each group are located in four directions of east, south, west, and north. The sig- nals from these neutron detectors are not used for the target pro- tection. These signals are only used for the online monitoring of neutron flux. The location of beam center is  estimated online in  the control system by calculating the following ratios:
@25
@26
where t is blockage time, and £A(t), £B(t), £C(t), and £D(t) are the neutron flux at time t at points A, B, C, and D, respectively. The ver-
tical three neutron detectors in each direction of east, south, west, or north provide the axial distribution of neutron flux (Zhao et al., 2015, 2016).
5.2.Target trip signals
In order to protect the target against any abnormal irradiation by the accelerator’s beam, two sets of target trip signals are obtained from the temperature monitoring system. Fig. 9 shows
Fig. 9. Overtemperature protection logic system for spallation target.
the overtemperature protection system with the granular blockage trip and beam offset trip signals for the spallation target. TU(i), TC(i), and TL(i) with i = 1, 2, 3, and 4 represent the temperature measured with the thermocouples in the upper, central and lower locations, respectively. T0 is a temperature setpoint which is a function of granules’ working temperature. For example, if the working tem- perature of tungsten granules in the target container is 523 K, T0 can be set as 623 K. If the measured temperature is greater than   or equal to the setpoint T0, the affected channel is tripped. If two  or more channels are simultaneously tripped, the protection sys- tem is automatically tripped.
As shown in Fig. 9, the granular blockage trip signal is produced from four protection channels, i.e. the four temperatures in the directions of east, south, west,  and  north. Channel independence  is maintained throughout the system, from the sensor to the device which actuates the protective function. Physical separation is used to achieve separation of the redundant transmitters. Separation of wiring is achieved by using separate wireways, cable trays, conduit runs, and containment penetrations for redundant channels.
On the other hand, the beam offset trip signal is produced from the three temperatures in the upper, central and lower locations. Four offset trip signals may be produced from the four directions of east, south, west, and north. As same as the granular blockage trip, channel independence is maintained throughout the system in the beam offset trip. Finally, if one or more trip signals among the blockage and offset trips are produced, the trip breaker in the protection system sends a signal to the chopper in the beam permit system which is installed at the low energy beam transport (LEBT) section in the accelerator. The chopper, consisting of a pair of elec- trical deflection plates, will be able to switch off the beam in a microsecond. At the same time, the trip breaker removes power from the ECR ion  source, allowing the accelerator to shut down  its beam. The time needed to switch off the power of the ion source is a few hundreds of microseconds.
6.Conclusion
The spatio-temporal variations of the target temperatures have been investigated with the heat transfer model. The main simula- tion results are summarized as follows. (1) Beam scanning can be used to avoid very high temperature at the target center by moving the beam centre at a constant rate in the azimuthal angles between
0 and 360°, and the radial positions between 5 and 75 mm. The
granular-flow target in a granular speed of 500 mm/s can operate
normally when it is bombarded by the 10 mA proton beam with beam scanning. (2) When the granules are blocked within the tar- get, the temperatures in four directions of east, south, west, and north of the target increase with the blockage time. The granular blockage can also be detected by measuring the temperatures in the four directions. (3) When accelerator’s beam  deviates  from the target centre for more than 1 s, the azimuthal distribution of the target temperature becomes ununiform. Beam deviation can  be detected by comparing the temperatures in the four directions of east, south, west, and north. There  is  higher  temperature  in the direction close to the beam centre than that far from the beam centre.
Based  on  the  simulation  results, an over-temperature  protec-
tion system has been designed for the spallation target in CiADS facility to prevent the granular target from abnormal irradiation by the accelerator’s beam. The monitoring system in the target pro- tection includes 12 sets of thermocouples which are fixed within in the target in the upper, central and lower part of the target, respec- tively, where 4 thermocouples in each group are located in four directions of east, south, west, and north. The granular blockage trip signal is triggered if two or more temperatures of four direc-
tions in one group exceed the setpoint; while the beam offset trip signal is produced if two or more channels in one direction are greater than the setpoint. In the protection system of CiADS facil- ity, if one or more trip signals are produced, the accelerator’s beam is switched off in a few hundreds of microseconds.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Founda- tion of China (Grant No. 11875298) and Joint Large-Scale Scientific Facility Funds of the NSFC and CAS (Grant No. U1832205).
