<title>Modeling of the radiation doses during dismantling of RBMK-1500 reactor emergency core cooling system large diameter pipes</title>
<author>Audrius Simonis ⇑, Povilas Poskas, Gintautas Poskas, Dalia Grigaliuniene</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Engineering Laboratory, Lithuanian Energy Institute, Kaunas, Lithuania
</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2015.04.034</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2015.04.034 </URL>
ABSTRACT
Personnel radiation safety is one of the most important issues during the dismantling of nuclear instal- lations. In this paper, results of modeling radiation doses during the dismantling of the large diameter pipes from the emergency core cooling system of RBMK-1500 reactor at Ignalina NPP are presented. The effective doses to the workers are modeled for four dismantling alternatives in order to propose  the optimal dismantling approach. The impacts of the cutting technology and individual respiration protection on effective doses are analyzed. The total effective personnel doses are obtained by summing the effective personnel doses from various sources of exposure, i.e., direct radiation from radioactive equipment, internal radiation due to inhalation and ingestion of radioactive aerosols, and direct radiation from radioactive aerosols arising during hot cutting. The collective effective doses and their uncertainties are analyzed using VISIPLAN and MATLAB codes.
Keywords:
RBMK-1500 reactor Dismantling
Large diameter pipes Doses modeling
1.Introduction
Ignalina NPP is the only nuclear power plant in Lithuania. Ignalina NPP operated two similar RBMK-1500 units with an installed capacity of 1500 MW each. They were commissioned in 1983 and 1987, and the original design  lifetime was projected  up  to 2010 and 2015, respectively. However, the ﬁrst unit was shut- down at the end of 2004 and the second one was shutdown at       the end of 2009. The Lithuanian Government approved an immediate decommissioning strategy (The Republic of Lithuania Government Resolution, 2002).
Building 117/1 with the installed Emergency Core Cooling System (ECCS) is the ﬁrst dismantling project at Ignalina NPP. After the shutdown of the ﬁrst unit of INPP, ECCS pressurized tanks, large diameter pipes, fast-acting valves and the Helium Make-up Station became redundant and were no  longer  needed for safety or operational purposes; hence they could be progres- sively dismantled. Radiological contamination of internal surfaces of some equipment (large diameter pipes, small pipes, pressurized tanks) that had been in contact with the reactor core cooling water was detected (Environment Impact Assessment Report, 2008).
Nowadays, due to enhancements in computer systems, the dis- mantling activities are planned using various computer codes, tak- ing into account detailed information on radiation ﬁelds. The SCK-SEN Laboratory in Belgium developed the computer code VISIPLAN (Vermeersch, 2005) widely used to solve radiation pro- tection problems such as the handling of ﬁbre-reinforced concrete containers of conditioned radioactive waste (Panik and Zachar, 2009), using conditional release materials in the form of steel rail- way tracks  (Tatransky  and  Necˇas,  2009)  or  modeling of  an  intru- sion scenario into a deep geological repository (Pritrsky  and  Ondra, 2006). Other software used to solve radiation protection problems is, e. g. MCNP, which was used to evaluate external doses to the workers during the dismantling of the thermal column door of a Korean research reactor (Park, 2008) or to support the prepa- ration for the decommissioning plan of the reactor pressure vessel at Kori-1 NPP (Jeong, 2014).
In this paper, the effective doses and their uncertainties during the dismantling of the large diameter pipes from the ECCS at INPP are analyzed. The total effective personnel doses are obtained by summarizing the doses from direct radiation due to radioactive equipment, from inhalation and ingestion of radioactive aerosols, and from direct radiation due to radioactive aerosols arising during hot cutting.
2.Dismantling alternatives of ECCS large diameter pipes
The function of ECCS was to ensure cooling of the reactor during the ﬁrst two minutes after an accident with the primary reactor cooling system. The system includes 16 pressurized tanks, valves and pipelines. The volume of each tank is 25 m3. During  operation,each tank is ﬁlled with water and pressurized with nitrogen above the water surface. ECCS pressurized tanks are connected to the reactor by two large diameter (426 mm) parallel pipes (pipe No.      1 and pipe No. 2) along the corridor (Fig. 1). The total length of   the pipes in the corridor is about 140 m (Environment Impact Assessment Report, 2008).
Radiological contamination of the ECCS system internal surfaces has resulted from recirculation/storage of primary circuit water from Unit 1. In 2007, INPP staff performed radiological measure- ments. The results on contamination of internal surfaces of  the large diameter pipes are presented in Table 1.
In the corridor, there is only supply ventilation. To avoid con- tamination spread outside the corridor during the dismantling, exhaust ventilation is necessary. The exhaust ventilation system with mobile ﬁltration unit (MFU) can be installed only outside the corridor, in the ECCS pressurized tanks’ room, because the space in the corridor is very limited. The system can be connected directly to one of the large diameter pipes. So the large diameter pipe will be a ventilation duct in the corridor used to extract the fumes generated during the dismantling. To avoid the reconnection of the MFU to the second pipe, a ﬂexible duct can be used to con- nect the ends of pipes.
The dismantling approach for the large diameter pipes is to cut them into segments of 1 m length and transport them one by one from the corridor to the room containing the ECCS pressurized tanks. Thus, the dismantling will be started by cutting one pipe      at the wall of the ECCS pressurized tanks room  and continue to  the end of the corridor. After dismantling of one pipe, another pipe will be to dismantled from the far end of the corridor.
Wall thickness of the large diameter pipes is 0.024 m. For such thickness, the oxy-acetylene cutting and plasma cutting technolo- gies can be used. Due to limited space around the pipes, a cutting technology with remotely controlled torch was selected. Thus, two alternatives of automatic cutting technology are analyzed, i.e. automatic oxy-acetylene cutting technology and automatic plasma cutting technology.
Based on the Lithuanian nuclear safety requirements (State Nuclear Power Safety Inspectorate Decree, 2011), the zones within the controlled areas in nuclear objects are deﬁned into the three categories that address radiation, surface contamination and air- borne contamination. Due to the low radiation condition in the corridor, it is classiﬁed as a zone of Category 3. Thus, using MFU for extraction of generated fumes, workers can use respirators with low degree of protection, e.g. dusk masks (the results presented below show the low concentrations of aerosols). Furthermore, as a cautions assumption the use of a half-face mask for workers is analyzed.So, four dismantling alternatives were formulated for analysis:
1.The automatic oxy-acetylene cutting equipment is used for pipe cutting. Workers are using dust masks.
Fig. 1. Photograph of the large diameter pipes in the corridor of the Building 117/1.
Table 1
Contamination of internal surfaces (Environment Impact Assessment Report, 2008).
2.The automatic oxy-acetylene cutting equipment is used for pipe cutting. Workers are using half-face masks.
3.The automatic plasma cutting equipment is used for pipe cut- ting. Workers are using dust masks.
4.The automatic plasma cutting equipment is used for pipe cut- ting. Workers are using half-face masks.
The alternatives are summarized in Table 2.
It was assumed that, regardless of the cutting technology, three workers (Cutter, Helper and Transporter) perform all the disman- tling works.
3. Methodology of dose modeling
During the cutting process, radioactive aerosols released into the air could deposit onto the workers’ clothes. As the workers wear protective clothes, gloves, hoods etc., they are protected against dust and alpha emitters. Radioactive aerosols or radioactive particles do not ﬁx on the protective clothes and easily fall off on the ground. Beta radiation will be reduced due to protective clothes; therefore it is not taken into account since it is much less signiﬁcant than other exposure pathways. During dismantling of the large diameter pipes, four exposure pathways were analyzed: direct radiation (gamma radiation), inhalation, ingestion and submersion.
The computer code VISIPLAN is intended for estimation of gamma radiation dose rates in simple and complex 3D geometries. In this code, calculation of the dose rate for a radiation source is based on the ‘‘point kernel’’ method. The photon ﬂux at the dose point near a volume source can  be  determined  by  considering the volume source to consist of a number of point sources (Vermeersch, 2005).
The photon ﬂux is calculated using:@1
where S – source strength is the number of photons emitted by the source per unit time and volume, n s—1 cm—3, B – build-up factor, b – the number of mean free paths (deﬁning the attenuation effective- ness of a shield), q – the distance from a point within the volume source, V – the source volume.
Based on the photon ﬂux at the selected point, the computer code calculates the dose rate depending on the dose conversion factors:
Table 2
Dismantling alternatives.
@2
where hi – the dose conversion coefﬁcient (Data for Use in Protection Against External Radiation, 1987) for photons of energy i, u – the ﬂux of the photons at energy i, t – the time during which the worker is exposed to ionizing radiation from the radioactive equipment, h.
For uncertainty analysis of direct radiation in this paper, dose rate factors were used. They were obtained for each worker’s posi- tion using sources with an activity of 1 Bq in VISIPLAN. Thus, the effective dose for direct radiation is calculated using the  expression:@3
where rin – inner radius of a contaminated pipe, cm, h – length of
the source (in the model all sources are 1 m length), cm, top – time  of operation, h, DRN,i – dose rate factor in the worker position N from i-th source with 1 Bq of total activity, mSv (h Bq)—1, Ai – surface activity of the i-th source.
In the dismantling model, the pipes are segmented into 1 length radioactive sources. Each radioactive source is modeled as cylindrical homogeneous contamination (thickness 2 mm) with density 7900 kg/m3 and length 1 m.During the testing of the model computations it was detected that in the case of pipes of 10 m length (10 sources), the dose rate contribution from the most distant source to the point in the centre between the two pipes was only 0.01%, therefore for the dose rate modeling, a 10 m length part of the pipes was considered sufﬁcient for use.
Based on IAEA Safety Guide (Assessment of Occupational Exposure due to Intakes of Radionuclides, 1999), the effective dose due to  inhalation by workers was calculated using the  expression:@4
where INH – worker’s breathing rate (Assessment of Occupational Exposure due to Intakes of Radionuclides, 1999), the standard worker’s breathing rate is 1.2 m3 h—1, tinh – time during which the worker breathes from the radioactive cloud, h, APFr – assigned pro- tection factor of respirator type r (Assigned Protection Factors for the Revised Respiratory Protection Standard, 2009), k – portion of inhaled activity, DCFinh,i – effective dose coefﬁcient for the i-th radionuclide (Assessment of Occupational Exposure due to Intakes of  Radionuclides,  1999)  (for  modeling cautions values are   used),
Ci,c,v – air concentration of the i-th radionuclide for cutting technol- ogy c and air ﬂow v, Bq m—3.
Normally, at a workplace where radioactive contamination is possible, measures are taken to prohibit eating, drinking and smok- ing. In the model it is assumed that these measures are taken. Therefore, it is assumed that contamination from the air to the lips and mouth passes through the respirator. Based on an IAEA Safety Guide (Assessment of Occupational Exposure due to Intakes of Radionuclides, 1999), the effective dose  by ingestion to  workers  in models that analyzed the cutting operation was calculated using the expression:@5
where (1 k) – portion of ingested activity, DCFing,i – effective dose coefﬁcient for the i-th radionuclide (Assessment of Occupational Exposure due to Intakes of Radionuclides, 1999).
As indicated above in this paper, two respirator types were ana- lyzed, i.e. dust masks and half face-masks. Dust masks have a lower protection level, are not reusable, have a lack of adjustability and a breathing resistance, therefore the moisture builds up inside them (exhalation valves do help minimize this), however their usage is quite simple. Half-face masks have more advantages in comparison with dust masks: they have higher protection level, are reusable, have adjustable straps to provide a better ﬁt, and can be equipped with a speaking diaphragm to ease communication. But they can be uncomfortable in a warmer environment and require a mainte- nance program for cleaning and reuse.
Based on a Federal Guidance Report (Eckerman and Ryman, 1993), the external exposure effective dose to workers due to the generated radioactive aerosols (submersion dose) is calculated using the expression:
@6
where tsub – time during which the worker is exposed to ionizing radiation from the radioactive cloud (for modeling, the cutting duration is assumed), h, DCFsub,i – effective dose coefﬁcient for the i-th radionuclide (Eckerman and Ryman, 1993).
The aerosol concentration for each radionuclide during the cut- ting process is calculated using the expression:
@7
where zx – kerf width of type x cutting technology, cm, l – kerf length, cm, Ai – surface activity of the i-th radionuclide, Bq cm—2, fx – released respirable mass fraction of removed material that becomes indoor dust using type x cutting technology, t – time to cut material, h, Qv – air ﬂow from the room to the outside, m3 h—1. Based on (Ebadian and Dua, 2001), it is assumed that the frac- tion of the removed material, that becomes indoor dust (released respirable mass), is 2% of the cut-out mass if the oxy-acetylene cut- ting technology is used. If the plasma cutting technology is used,
the fraction of the removed material is assumed to be 1.9%.
The initial tasks such as MFU connection to the pipe and con-
because they are quickly performed. The most signiﬁcant task is dismantling of the large diameter pipes in the corridor. To deﬁne the external exposure to the workers for different situations during the dismantling of the large diameter pipes, the dismantling pro- cess is simpliﬁed into four computer models (Fig. 2):
Model No. 1. Model consists of two pipes. The dismantling of pipe No. 2 is performed.
Model No. 2. Transportation of a segment of pipe No. 2 along pipe No. 1 is performed.
Model No. 3. Model consists of pipe No. 1, i.e. pipe No. 2 is already dismantled. The dismantling of pipe No. 1 is performed. Model No. 4. Transportation of a segment of pipe No. 1 along pipe No. 1 is performed.
For each dismantling model, the positions of workers and dura- tions of the tasks were deﬁned. The analyzed tasks are: prepara- tion, cutting, waiting, transportation of the cut pipe segment and return back to the cutting place.
The preparation task consists of marking the cutting line,  mounting the track and preparation of the cutting equipment.
These  tasks are  performed by  two workers  (Cutter and Helper) at
0.1 m distance from the surface of the cut pipe. At that time, the Transporter pulls a trolley with a cut pipe segment to the work- shop keeping 1 m distance from the trolley (transportation task), and after leaving the segment in the ECCS pressurized tanks’ room, the Transporter comes back to the cut pipe (return back task). Duration of transportation or return to the cutting area depends on the remaining length of the pipe in the corridor. Before the next cutting, the trolley is put under the pipeline segment to be cut. The
Fig. 2. Dose rates during dismantling of the large diameter pipe with positions of the workers. During the preparation works the Cutter and the Helper are at position No. 1. During cutting, the Cutter is at position No. 2 and the Helper and the Transporter are at position No. 3. The Transporter during transportation of a pipe segment to the workshop is at position No. 4 and during return to the cutting place he is at position No. 5.
Transporter waits (wait task) while the other workers ﬁnish prepa- ration works if the duration of transportation of the pipe segment and the return is shorter than the preparation duration. In other cases, the Cutter and the Helper wait (wait task) while the Transporter returns back and puts the trolley under the pipeline.
Table 3
Parameters distributions used in the modeling.
Parameter	Alias  Distribution  Mean  Std. Dev (%)
The cut time (cutting task) depends on the cutting rate of the cut- ting technology. During the cutting process, the Cutter supervises the equipment at a distance of 0.5 m from the surface of the cut pipe. The other workers stand back from the pipes and wait (wait task) while the pipe segment is cut.
During the modeling, it is assumed that the inhalation, inges- tion and submersion time are the same and depend on the cutting duration. The cutting duration is calculated using the expression:
@8
where v –  cutting rate using cutting x  technology,  mm/min, l  – kerf
length, mm. The cutting rate of the automatic oxy-acetylene cutting
technology depends on the selected cutting nozzle model and thick-ness of the metal. The cutting rate of the automatic plasma cutting technology  depends   mainly  on  the   output   current (ESAB  plasma	cutting equipment, 2015).
A computer program using MATLAB was developed for uncer- tainty analysis. 10,000 simulations were performed for each pipe segment operation (in total, 140 pipe segments). For modeling ran- dom processes, the most widely used distribution, i.e. the normal distribution, was selected. Distributions parameters used for mod- eling are provided in Table 3.
When modeling the inhalation, ingestion and  submersion doses, the activity of the internal surfaces of the large diameter pipes was calculated for 26 radionuclides using scaling factors deﬁned for the ECCS equipment (Remeikis, 2009).
4.Results and discussion
Using VISIPLAN code, the dose rate maps (isodoses) from the pipes with surface activity (indicated in Table 1) are obtained for all dismantling models and presented in Fig. 2. As it can be seen from model No. 1, the dose rates from pipe No. 2 are higher than the dose rates from pipe No. 1 due to higher contamination with Co-60.
The modeling results show (Fig. 3) that using the oxy-acetylene cutting technology, the large diameter pipe dismantling takes approximately 5 h longer than with the plasma cutting technology. The aerosol concentrations during cutting of the large diameter pipes into segments show (Fig. 3) that the concentrations of aero- sols during dismantling of pipe No. 2 using the oxy-acetylene
Table 3
Parameters distributions used in the modeling.
cutting technology are approximately 3 Bq/m3. In the case of using the plasma cutting technology they are approximately 7 Bq/m3. During dismantling of pipe No. 1, the concentrations of radionu- clides in aerosols are a factor of two lower due to low activity of radionuclide Co-60.
The comparison of personal doses from direct radiation (Fig. 4) shows that the effective dose for the Cutter is the highest, i.e. approximately 18% higher than the dose to the Helper and 65% higher than the dose to the Transporter.
Fig. 3. Whisker diagrams of dismantling durations and aerosol concentrations.
Fig. 4. Whisker diagrams of personal and collective doses from direct radiation.
The collective dose mean value from direct radiation (Fig. 4) can be decreased by approximately 14% if dismantling alternative A3 or A4 (alternatives using the plasma cutting technology), are used instead of selecting alternative A1 or A2 (alternatives using the oxy-acetylene cutting technology).
Results of inhalation and ingestion dose modeling show (Fig. 5) that the collective inhalation and ingestion dose mean values in  alternative A3 (alternative using the plasma cutting  technology and dust masks) are the highest. The lowest collective doses are     in alternatives A2 and A4 (using half-face masks) and the collective inhalation and ingestion doses decrease by 98% in comparison with alternatives A1 and A3 (using dust masks).
The lower collective inhalation, ingestion and submersion doses are received if the oxy-acetylene  cutting  technology  (alternative A1 or A2) is used; i.e. values are approximately 47% lower in com- parison with the alternatives A3 or A4 when the plasma cutting technology is used.
The highest collective effective dose (the worst case) is received in alternative A1 (alternative using the oxy-acetylene cutting tech- nology and dust masks) (Fig. 5). The lowest collective effective dose (the best case) is received in alternative A4 (alternative using the plasma cutting technology and half-face masks).
The modeling results are summarized in Table 4. As can be seen, the largest part of the mean collective dose is from direct radiation (98–99%). Inhalation dose contributes 1–2% to the total effective dose. Ingestion and submersion doses also contribute a small part (<1%).
The collective effective dose can be decreased by a maximum of 16% if, during the dismantling of the large diameter pipes, alterna- tive A4 (alternative using the plasma cutting technology and half face masks) is selected comparing with alternative A1 (alternative using the oxy-acetylene  cutting  technology  and  dust  masks)  (Fig. 6). The collective effective dose difference between alterna- tives A1 or A2 (alternatives using the oxy-acetylene cutting
Fig. 5. Whisker diagrams of collective doses from inhalation, ingestion and submersion, and collective effective doses from all radiation exposure pathways.
Table 4
The collective dose comparison.
technology) and alternatives A3 or A4 (alternatives using the plasma cutting technology) is 13–14%. The collective effective dose difference between alternatives A1 or A3 (using dust masks) and alternatives A2 or A4 (using half-face masks) is only 2%. So, from effective dose minimization point of view, alternative A4 is the best choice but practically alternative A3 could be selected because the difference in collective effective dose is only 2%.
Based on the Lithuanian Hygiene Standard (Lithuanian Hygiene Standard, 2001), the occupational exposure of any worker shall be controlled in order not to exceed the dose limits. An effective dose of 20 mSv per year averaged over ﬁve consecutive years is one of the dose limits. Assuming that there are 245 working days per year and 6 effective working hours per day, the dose limit per hour would be 0.014 mSv. Individual doses (taking into account the dis-mantling duration of the large diameter pipe) were compared with
this dose limit for each analyzed alternative, and it was revealed that the individual doses do not exceed the dose limit. The individ- ual doses in each alternative are approximately 44 times for the Cutter, approximately 53 times for the Helper and approximately 117 times for the Transporter below the dose limit.
The investment cost is also important when selecting the dis- mantling alternative. The cost of the plasma cutting technology is Fig. 6. Comparison of the collective effective doses mean values.
approximately 6000 Eur, and of the oxy-acetylene cutting technol- ogy is approximately 1000 Eur (taking into account consumptions of nozzles, oxygen and acetylene gas). So, the plasma cutting tech- nology is approximately 6 times more expensive in comparison with the oxy-acetylene cutting technology. However, plasma cut- ting can be performed on any type of conductive metal, whereas oxy-acetylene is limited to steel and other ferrous metals which support the oxidizing process. Metals like aluminum and stainless steel form oxides that inhibit further oxidization making conven- tional oxy fuel cutting impossible. This is important during the dis- mantling activities in nuclear power plants. The advantage of the plasma cutting technology was also demonstrated when analyzing collective effective doses (see Fig. 6).
The cost of three half-face masks used in alternatives A2 or A4 is approximately 1000 Eur. The cost of dust masks in alternatives A1 or A3 is approximately 2–3 times smaller compared with the half-face masks.
So, taking into account doses and the cost analysis it is possible to conclude that alternative A3 is the best choice for dismantling of the large diameter pipes.
5.Conclusion
After evaluation of four dismantling alternatives of the large diameter pipes from the emergency core cooling system, the fol- lowing conclusions have been drawn:
1.Contribution to the total effective dose from direct radiation is 98–99%, from inhalation dose – 1–2% and from ingestion and submersion doses – only <1%.
2.The collective effective dose decreases by approx. 13–14% if alternatives A3 or A4 (using the plasma  cutting  technology) are selected instead of alternatives A1 or A2 (using the oxy-cutting technology). The collective effective dose decreases only by 2% if alternatives A1 or A4 (using half-face masks) are selected instead of alternatives A1 or A3 (using dust masks).
3.Taking into account doses and the cost analysis, alternative A3 (using the plasma cutting technology and dust masks) is the  best choice for dismantling of the large diameter pipes.
