<title>The role of radiation protection professionals in the landscape of low dose radiation</title>
<author>Armin Ansari, PhD, CHP</author>
<Affiliation>Emergency Management, Radiation, and Chemical Branch Division of Environmental Health Science and Practice, NCEH Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; MS:F59</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radiological Protection</Journal>
<Publishing_house>IOP Publishing</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1088/1361-6498/ab15e6</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6498/ab15e6</URL>
Abstract
Radiation protection professionals benefit from using and applying a robust system of radiologicalprotection that has evolved and matured through decades of research and experience. Nevertheless,uncertainties in potential health effects from low doses and low dose rates of radiation continue to remain. This uncertainty, coupled with complex jargon and nuances, has created an environment where the system of radiological protection can be misrepresented, even by radiation safety
professionals, and by extension, misunderstood by the public. While it is universally agreed that the
linear-no-threshold model cannot adequately explain or predict health effects of low dose radiation for all cancers, all individuals, or all exposure situations, the recommendation of authoritative scientific
bodies to use this model for managing risks of radiation exposure is unequivocal. The role of individual
radiation protection professionals in communicating radiation health and risk information is critical and
consistent with the primary objective of professional organizations that represent them, mainly to
promote best science and practice of radiation protection. If radiation protection professionals provide advice contrary to the recommendations and advice of regulatory and authoritative scientific bodies, it
can erode public confidence in the system of radiological protection and harm the credibility of our
profession.
Keywords: Low dose radiation, linear-no-threshold assumption, public communication
1. Introduction
Over the last several decades, the radiation protection community has benefited from a large volume
of research from molecular, cellular, and animal experiments as well as large epidemiological studies
investigating the health effects of radiation exposure. This large body of research on health effects of
ionizing radiation, perhaps larger than the volume of data for any other potentially harmful agent [1,2],has informed and improved the system of radiological protection for workers and the public, and it
continues to do so.
Nevertheless, uncertainties in potential health effects from low doses and low dose rates of radiation
continue to remain. This uncertainty, coupled with complex jargon and nuances, has created an environment where the system of radiological protection can be misrepresented, even by radiation
safety professionals, and by extension, misunderstood by the public. Consequently, instead of promoting confidence in the system of radiological protection, these mischaracterizations can increase
anxiety and erode public confidence.This paper examines the role of radiation protection professionals, beyond the best practice of
radiation safety, in the accurate and effective communication of the system of radiological protection
to the larger community.
extrapolation from high doses, remains a “prudent basis for radiological protection at low doses and
low dose rates” [7]. This is based on an assumption by the Commission that, at radiation doses below
about 100 mSv, the probability of stochastic effects is not zero, but the effects occur with a vanishingly
small probability and in proportion to decreasing radiation dose down to zero. The ICRP Publication 99
examined the data for the possibility of a low-dose threshold and concluded that while the existence of
a low-dose threshold does not seem to be unlikely for certain radiation-related cancers, the evidence
does not favor the existence of a universal threshold for all cancers, hence the prudence of applying
the LNT model for radiation protection purposes [8].
In the United States, the congressionally chartered National Council on Radiation Protection and
Measurements (NCRP) reviewed the latest epidemiological data specifically regarding their
implications for the LNT model and radiation protection [9]. After this exhaustive review, the NCRP
concluded that “no alternative dose-response relationship appears more pragmatic or prudent for
radiation protection purposes than the LNT model,” and the LNT model should continue to be used for radiation protection purposes. This NCRP conclusion is consistent with judgments by other national and international scientific committees such as the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) [10].
Approximately ten years prior to publications of ICRP 103 [7] and NCRP Commentary 27 [9], two
influential reports were published by the U.S. National Research Council of the National Academies of
Sciences Engineering and Medicine and the French Academy of Sciences [11, 12]. Although these two
reports appeared different in the focus of their discussions and interpretation of the underlying
science, the final conclusion of both reports regarding the use of LNT model for radiation protection
purposes were similar. The Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation VII (BEIR VII) report concluded that
the preponderance of evidence suggests there will be a small risk even at low doses of radiation and
endorsed the LNT model for radiation protection [11].The joint report of the French Academy of Sciences and Academy of Medicine elaborated the
complexities of cellular response to ionizing radiation damage citing the latest molecular radiation
biology research findings. The report suggested evidence for existence of a “practical threshold.”
However, it concluded that “on the basis of our present knowledge, it is not possible to define the
threshold level … or to provide the evidence for it” [12]. Furthermore, the value of this practical
threshold is likely to vary with the cell type and age of the individual. The French Academy report
expanded on the misuse of LNT and misapplication of LNT when calculating collective dose and
predicting harm for individuals in large populations exposed to small doses. Nevertheless, for radiation
protection purposes, the French Academy concluded that LNT “should be considered as a tool which is useful for regulatory purposes because it simplifies the administrative task.”Two more examples follow. The Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) is an intergovernmental organization under the framework of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). It
consists of 33 countries from Europe, North America and the Asia-Pacific region, accounting for
approximately 82% of the world's installed nuclear capacity. Its stated mission is to assist its member
countries in maintaining “the scientific, technological and legal bases required for a safe … use of
nuclear energy” by providing “authoritative assessments … on key issues as input to government
decisions on nuclear energy policy” [13]. The NEA in its 2016 publication, Radiological Protection
Science and Application, states that despite inherent limitations, “the LNT model is, in regulation and
practice, the most widely used and recommended approach for prospectively managing radiation
risks” [14].
Lastly, as another example of a national authoritative organization, the Swiss Commission for Radiation
Protection and Surveillance of Radioactivity concluded that “the LNT model remains the best tool to
manage the risk of radiation exposure” [15].
3.1 Risk management vs. risk assessment
An important consideration to note is that the recommendation for use of the LNT model is for the"management” of radiation risk, and not for “assessment” of radiation risk. This is an important distinction that is often overlooked. While these authoritative organizations support the use of the
linear assumption for radiation protection purposes and managing risk to workers and the public, they do not support applying those risk factors to assign health risks to individuals, retrospectively or
prospectively. For example, when calculations based on collective dose are used to predict the
number of cancers induced if millions of people were exposed to a few micro-sieverts, the results are
misleading and UNSCEAR, ICRP, and NCRP explicitly advise against this misapplication of the LNT
model.
As radiation protection professionals, we are keenly aware of challenges in communicating health
effects of low radiation doses to individuals and populations, along with the uncertainties, in a manner
that our audience finds informative. The perfect balance between clarity of the message and scientific
33accuracy of the information is not easy to maintain. The implication that the LNT model is appropriate
for radiation risk management but not applicable to risk assessment at low doses makes the task of risk communication significantly more challenging.
3.2 Assumption or model vs. hypothesis
In science, a hypothesis is an idea or explanation that is proposed so its validity can be put to test. In the context of radiation protection practice and recommendations by the authoritative bodies, LNT is not a hypothesis. It is almost universally agreed that LNT cannot adequately explain or predict health
effects of radiation for all cancers, all individuals, or all exposure situations. LNT in the context of
radiation protection practice is a model or an assumption, and in this context, it should not be referred
to as a “hypothesis”.
4. Discussion and conclusions
Radiation protection professionals benefit from using and applying a robust system of radiological
protection that has evolved and matured through decades of research and experience. A culture of
safety is in place. Unnecessary exposures to workers, patients, and the public have been reduced. Our
system of radiological protection is not perfect, however, and it has room for improvements [16].
Some principles of radiation protection such as ALARA (As Low As Reasonably Achievable) can be
misapplied and dose optimization may have been reduced to dose minimization in some practices.
This could result in misplaced priorities and expenditures, or create physical or emotional hardship for
the people whom the system of radiological protection intends to serve. Concepts such as collective
dose can be misused and result in exaggerated risks and unwarranted public anxiety. These issues or
misapplication and misuse are not unique to the field of radiation protection, and it is not a fault of the system itself.
As practitioners of the profession, one role of radiation protection professionals is to provide accurate
scientific information to stakeholders while realizing that, in many cases, decisions are multifaceted
and other societal factors may play a role in making those decisions.
Routinely, matters of radiation protection with workers and the public involve low dose and low dose
rate exposure situations. The endorsement of the LNT model for managing risks of radiation exposure
by authoritative national and international scientific bodies is unequivocal. The foundation of radiation
protection practice and national regulations rests on the valued recommendations of such
organizations.
For the system of radiological protection to be effective, it needs to have the public’s confidence. If
radiation protection professionals provide information contrary to the recommendation and advice of
regulatory and authoritative scientific bodies (such as UNSCEAR, ICRP, NCRP, and numerous other
radiation protection organizations) throughout the world, it can erode the public’s confidence in the
system itself.
The role of individual radiation protection professionals in communicating radiation health and risk
information is critical and consistent with the primary objective of professional organizations that
represent them, mainly to promote best science and practice of radiation protection. Doing so with a
unified voice can facilitate public confidence.
While the landscape of low dose and low dose rate exposure, because of its uncertainties and
complexities, provides many opportunities for misunderstanding, unintentional misrepresentation and
mischaracterizations, it is incumbent upon us, the radiation protection professionals, to do our best to
minimize such occurrences, and at the very least avoid unintentionally contributing to them. The
credibility of our profession depends on it.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to acknowledge Dr. James M. Smith for his thoughtful discussions on the topic and helpful suggestions for this manuscript.
Disclaimer
The findings, conclusions, or statements in this presentation are those of the author and do not
necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/the
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry.
