<title>Conventional and new lead-free radiation shielding materials for radiation protection in nuclear medicine: A review</title>
<author>Nadin Jamal AbuAlRoos, Noorfatin Aida Baharul Amin, Raﬁdah Zainon</author>
<Affiliation>a.Oncological and Radiological Sciences Cluster, Advanced Medical and Dental Institute, Universiti Sains Malaysia, SAINS@BERTAM, 13200, Kepala Batas, Pulau Pinang,
Malaysia
b.School of Physics, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800, Gelugor, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2019.108439</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2019.108439</URL>
ABSTRACT
Gamma ray is an energetic ionising radiation that can damage living cells as it slows down and transfers its energy to surrounding cells. Lead and concrete have been used as radiation shielding materials. However, it  shows that lead toxicity is an important environmental disease and its eﬀects on the human body are devas- tating. Thus, there is an urgent need to ﬁnd a sustainable radiation shielding material  to safeguard  the human and the environment from destructive impact of radiation. High atomic number and high-density materials such as tungsten and concrete are the best eﬀective characteristics of radiation shielding materials. There are nu- merous experimental and theoretical works were performed on radiation shielding materials. This paper presents a review on the application of lead as radiation shielding material, current safety issues related to lead, current work on radiation shielding material and recent development of new lead-free shielding materials in nuclear medicine.
Keywords:
Ionising radiation Gamma radiation Lead
Lead-free material Radiation protection Radiation shielding
1.Introduction
Diﬀerent radiation shielding materials have been produced to safeguard the human and their surroundings from destructive impact of radiation (Oto et al., 2015; Singh et al., 2014). Weight, space and cost of the shielding material are important concerns that confront researchers in ﬁnding appropriate radiation shielding materials. Materials used for gamma radiation should have high density such as concrete or lead (Luković et al., 2015). Although low density materials can compensate with increased thickness to reduce the intensity of radiation, high density materials are more eﬀective.
A good perceiving of gamma ray interaction with matter is the ﬁrst key to ﬁnd radiation shielding material with appropriate physical properties. Materials with high atomic number and high-density ele- ments imposed high probability of interactions and larger energy transfer with gamma rays considered as a good choice for eﬀective gamma shields. Heavy materials known to have high ability in at- tenuation of gamma rays which is the most important characteristic of a radiation shielding material for radiation protection (Singh et al., 2014; Chang et al., 2015).
For many years, lead was the primary used radiation shielding material. Lead's physical and mechanical properties make it excellent
radiation shielding material. Recently, concern has been growing that the use of lead poses a safety and health hazards. Lead introduces an insidious hazard to the workers and patients that aﬀecting biochemical systems of the human body (Ogawa et al., 2008; Hsiao et al., 2011; Eid and Zawia, 2016). Thus, substitution of lead with non-toxic materials is vital. Nowadays, recent studies focus on ﬁnding a non-toxic, light, ﬂexible and low-cost radiation shielding material.
Glass materials are suitably alternatives to lead and concrete due to their physical and optical properties that can be easily modiﬁed by composition and preparation technique (Ersundu et al., 2018). Nowa- days, glasses and glass-ceramic have been utilised in radiation shielding applications. In addition, glasses have the ability to be doped with considerable amounts of heavy metals such as Bi2O3, PbO, WO3 and MoO3 (Sayyed et al., 2019a,b) to make it as an eﬀective lead-free ra- diation shielding material.
Recently, many researchers have studied and reported various glass systems for their possible applications as gamma-ray shielding mate- rials such as bismuth borate glasses, lead borate glasses, lead borate and bismuth lead borate glasses, barium borate ﬂyash glasses, lead borate glasses, phosphate glasses containing Bi2O3, PbO and BaO, lead stron- tium borate glasses, lead sodium borate glasses, silicate glasses con- taining Bi2O3, PbO and BaO, barium-bismuth-borosilicate glasses,
SiO2–B2O3–Al2O3–CaO–Na2O glasses, BaO:B2O3:Fly ash glasses lead and barium phosphate glasses, silicate glasses containing Bi2O3, bis- muth borosilicate glasses, heavy-metal oxide glasses, PbO–SiO2–Al2O3 and Bi2O3–SiO2–Al2O3 glasses, PbO–BaO– B2O3 glasses, tellurite glasses, and PbO‒Li2O‒B2O3 glasses (Tekin et al., 2017; Kurudirek et al., 2018; Elbashir et al., 2018; Mahapatra and Barai, 2018).
2.Criteria of gamma radiation shielding material
Gamma ray is a high energy electromagnetic radiation with no charge and no rest mass. Gamma rays emitted from nucleus of an ex- cited atom during nuclear decay process (the decay from high energy states of atomic nuclei to a lower state (Tsoulfanidis and Landsberger, 2015). They frequently accompany the emission of alpha and beta ra- diation as the excited nuclear states are created in the decay of a parent radionuclide. Gamma rays have very short wavelength and quite high frequency of the electromagnetic radiation. Thus, it can penetrate anything except the densest matter. Gamma ray is energetic ionising radiation and thus biologically hazardous.
Although gamma rays are electrically neutral, they can ionise atoms directly through photoelectric eﬀect and Compton eﬀect (Mcalister, 2012). It travels at speed of light and can travel thousands of meters in air before spending their energy (Kaur et al., 2018). Thus, they can easily penetrate matter and pass through human body eﬀortlessly as well. It can damage living cells as it slows down and transfers its energy to the surrounding cells. The nature of gamma radiation makes it very dangerous to the people who deals with it. On the hand, there is a good beneﬁt of usage of gamma ray in term of its applications in nuclear medicine ﬁeld.
Since gamma radiation can easily penetrate matter, it is biologically hazardous to living cells. Thus, it must be shielded by very dense ma- terial. High density and atomic number are desirable characteristics for gamma ray shielding. Researchers are continuously looking for a sus- tainable  radiation shielding material for radiation protection (Mann   et al., 2016). A material that can block maximum part of incident gamma photons considered as good shielding material (Manual et al., 2010).
3.Lead as a radiation shielding material
3.1.Lead properties
Lead has very good physical properties that makes a good shield property against gamma ray in nuclear medicine. The main advantage of using lead shield is its compactness due to its high density (Mirji and Lobo, 2017; Hulbert and Carlson, 2009). However, this radiation shielding material is dangerous to health because of its toxicity and the dust particles that formed on the surfaces of lead objects (Hulbert and Carlson, 2009). Moreover, the lead physical properties such as strength and hardness are not good for the hard environment. In this regard, searching for lead-free gamma radiation shielding is a serious issue as lead material proved to be toxic to human health.
3.2.Lead application in radiation protection
Lead is a common radiation shielding material for radiation pro- tection. The application of lead includes the use lead lined drywall and lead lined plywood in the construction of the laboratory and ex- amination room walls, ﬂoors and ceilings. Lead angles are designed to provide leak-proof nuclear shielding when there are cut-outs or pene- trations.
Furthermore, lead glass provides visibility and eﬀective gamma and X-ray radiation shielding for observation rooms and laboratories. In addition, lead bricks are used for shielding against primary gamma radiation radioactive during isotope preparation. Lead bricks are usually found within the radio-pharmacy unit to shield against higher
radiation levels (Hulbert and Carlson, 2009).
3.3.Safety issues with lead radiation shielding material in nuclear medicine
3.3.1.Lead dust
Most of radioactive tracers in nuclear medicine emit gamma ra- diation. This gamma radiation has a strong penetrating ability. Lead is widely used as a radiation shielding material in nuclear medicine due to its excellent shielding material properties (Cunningham, 2007; Khan   et al., 2010). However, this radiation shielding material can be dan- gerous due to formation of dust on the surface of lead objects. The lead dust may become airborne and be inadvertently inhaled or ingested by human (Hulbert and Carlson, 2009).
Furthermore, lead dust on the skin and the clothes of workers may also be taken home from work which is known as take-home exposure; it settles on surfaces from where it is then inhaled or ingested by young children with normal mouthing behaviours (Burns et al., 2017). A study done by Hulbert et al., showed that lead dust is a major source of lead exposure in children (Hulbert and Carlson, 2009). Lead dust is taken in through the lungs and gastrointestinal tract. Children have a higher respiratory rate than adults do, thus, children tend to respire and absorb more airborne lead. After absorption, lead enters the child's blood- stream, where it becomes a powerful and versatile toxin. Lead can aﬀect the central and peripheral nervous systems, bone marrow, kidneys, myocardium, endocrine and immune systems.
This is a potentially troubling ﬁnding, as lead-based dust is a well- known source of exposure that can be absorbed into the blood either by inhalation or by accidental ingestion, resulting in elevated blood lead levels. Furthermore, the lead dust can also contaminate ﬂoors and other nearby work surfaces (Dehghan et al., 2014; Taylor et al., 2012). This exposure should be minimised as much as possible (Materna et al., 2004). Airborne lead content monitoring is required because inhalation of lead particles is considered the main pathway into the body for workers.
3.3.2.Health hazards associated with lead shielding
The two most widely documented and predominantly routes of entry for toxins derived from lead bricks are inhalation and ingestion. When handling or working with lead shielding, the most common way that lead enters the body is via inhalation of airborne lead particles. When a lead brick is moved, lead dust is created and it can be inhaled into the lungs and upper respiratory tract (T P Martinez and Cournoyer, 2001).
Some studies suggest that dermal exposure is a mode of access for lead absorption but this may indeed reﬂect dermal contact leading to ingestion (Stevenson et al., 2008). Another means of uptake not gen- erally considered is that of in-utero transmission across the placenta to the brain of the foetus in women exposed to lead during pregnancy (Papanikolaou et al., 2005). Lead is neither biodegradable nor quickly excreted from the body, making its eﬀects long term and cumulative.
Human exposure to lead can induce toxic eﬀects on haematological, cardiovascular, nervous and reproductive systems. The adverse health eﬀects of lead exposure in children and adults are well documented (Dehghan et al., 2014; Millstone et al., 1995; Heath et al., 2003; Healey et al., 2009; Flakus, 1982; Bornefalk et al., 2006; Oteiza, 2008; Navas-
acien et al., 2007; Vaziri, 2008).
3.3.3.Lead back pain
Lead-equivalent shields, usually referred to as lead aprons are used to protect workers against radiation. With daily use, bending, or im- proper handling, the lead sheets and covering layers may split and, with growing gaps, lose their eﬀectiveness as protection against scattered ionising radiation (Burns et al., 2017). For these reasons, shields un- dergo regular radiographic assessment for gaps and cracks and those deemed unacceptable are removed from circulation (Mahesh et al., 2015; Smith et al., 2016, 2018).
The major cause of low-back pain in technologists are continuous overuse of back muscles. Several types of cumulative trauma disorder are possible in the clinical setting in nuclear medicine because of the
Table 1
Atomic number and density of lead, tungsten, and bismuth.
Material	Atomic number (Z)	Density (gm/cm3)
heavy weight of lead bricks used in the clinical setting. For example,
Myalgia is pain in one or more muscles, and tendonitis is inﬂammation of a tendon. Epicondylitis involves inﬂammation of and pain in certain bony prominences in the area of the elbow, usually resulting from ex- cessive strain on and twisting of the forearm (Bolus, 2019).
3.3.4.Immune system
Human exposure to lead can induce various biological eﬀects de- pending upon the level and duration of exposure. Several studies de- monstrated that exposure to lead is associated to toxic eﬀects also on the immune system, thus increasing the incidence of allergy, infectious disease, autoimmunity or cancer (Fenga et al., 2017).
It is well-established that exposure to lead can promote the devel- opment of several diseases and disorders through diﬀerent mechanisms of toxicity. The hypothesis that the immune system represents a critical target for lead-induced toxicity has been suggested by recent epide- miological and experimental studies (Hengstler et al., 2003).
3.3.5.Reproductive systems
The reproductive system of both males and females is aﬀected by chronic, high-dose exposures of lead (T P Martinez and Cournoyer, 2001). In males, the sperm count is reduced and other changes occur in the volume of sperm when blood lead levels exceed 40 μg/dL. Activities like motility and the general morphology of sperm are also aﬀected at this level (Navas-acien et al., 2007). The problems with the re- productivity of females due to lead exposure are more severe. Toxic levels of lead can lead to miscarriages, prematurity, low birth weight, and problems with development during childhood (Park et al., 2008).
3.3.6.Renal system
A number of studies found that low level environmental lead ex- posure is associated with accelerated deterioration of chronic renal insuﬃciency (Yu and Lin, 2004). Even at levels far below the limits of normal ranges in the general population, both blood lead level and blood lead burden were found to be increased, predicting accelerated progression of chronic renal disease (Wani et al., 2015).
3.3.7.Nervous system
Brain is the most sensitive organ to lead exposure (Cleveland et al., 2008). In children, synapse formation is greatly aﬀected in the cerebral cortex by lead. Lead also interferes with the development of neuro- chemicals, including neurotransmitters, and organisation of ion chan- nels (Asic and Of, 2008). Lead poisoning also causes loss of neuron myelin sheath, reduction in the number of neurons. Furthermore, it also interferes with neurotransmission and decreases neuronal growth (Rudolph et al., 2011).
4.Current work on radiation shielding material
4.1.Elimination and substitution of lead
Lead is a hazardous substance, making it a disposal and industrial hygiene problem. For many years, lead has been widely employed for shielding personnel from radioactive sources. Recently, there has been a growing concern that the use of lead poses a safety and long-term health hazard to counting facility personnel (Peterson, 2009).
Previous research done at the Los Alamos National Laboratory has explored the costs and beneﬁts of replacing lead with bismuth for routine shielding of personnel from radioactive sources (Timothy P Martinez and Cournoyer, 2001). Complete elimination of lead in the workplace, especially at nuclear facilities is desired. For radiation shielding against lower-energy sources that undergo photoelectric ef- fect or high-energy X-rays and gamma-rays that interact primarily
Table 1
Atomic number and density of lead, tungsten, and bismuth.
Table 2
Cost comparison of radiation shielding materials.
through pair production, bismuth, a non-hazardous replacement pro- vides suﬃcient protection without hampering the productivity of the worker. For medium range radiation sources that undergo the Compton scatter, tungsten with a density, almost twice that of lead is the non- hazardous material of choice (T P Martinez and Cournoyer, 2001, Timothy P Martinez and Cournoyer, 2001).
Table 1 shows a summary of atomic number and density of lead, tungsten and bismuth as radiation shielding materials. The shielding properties of lead versus bismuth and tungsten are compared within the photoelectric eﬀect range as shown in Fig. 1. It shows that the mass attenuation coeﬃcient and density factors are important parameters for shielding eﬀectiveness than the atomic number of the material in the low-energy gamma ray range. On the other hand, tungsten oﬀers almost twice as eﬀective as lead or bismuth for gamma rays with energies over 2 MeV (see Table 2).
Fig. 2 shows a comparison between pure lead, bismuth and tungsten at diﬀerent energy. The relative shielding eﬀectiveness of lead and bismuth is reduced to one-quarter that of lead. It shows that bismuth is slightly more eﬀective than lead at shielding. Tungsten is the best shielding material where small thickness of tungsten is required to shield high energy of gamma radiation.
Based on the previous mentioned study; there are no toxic or en- vironmental hazards associated with shielding made from tungsten or bismuth. Moreover, decontamination procedures and industrial hygiene support are not needed. No additional hazards are introduced by re- placing lead with tungsten or bismuth. Tungsten is more eﬀective shielding material than lead against medium-energy sources that ex- hibit Compton eﬀect while bismuth is more eﬀective than lead against lower-energy sources that undergo the photoelectric eﬀect. Bismuth is a convenient substitute material for lead as it shares many of the same characteristics that are desirable for gamma ray shielding such as high density and high atomic number.
One of the disadvantages of using bismuth as radiation shielding material is that it is brittle in its pure form and not conducive to forming bricks. Thus, many commercial bismuth bricks are made of a bismuth- polymer blend (Peterson, 2009).
4.2.Lead coating
Lead can be converted into less toxic by coating with a metal or polymer coatings. Metal coating is preferred over organic polymers because they are relatively more resistant to radiation damage. It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd a polymer that can bear against the abrasion and ra- diation conditions for many years to which lead bricks might be sub- jected. Nevertheless, polymer coatings are applicable and safe for op- erations where the shielding will not be exposed to higher radiation
Fig. 1. Comparison of gamma shielding materials. Retrieved from Timothy P Martinez and Cournoyer (2001).
levels (Nambiar and Yeow, 2012).
Lead bricks can be coated with Aluminium by several methods: electroplating, physical vapor deposition (PVD), and plasma spray de- position. Electroplating is not the best option because the process leads to some attack on the lead. Many materials are coated with Aluminium via PVD. Plasma spray is a cruder process than PVD, but the process may be suﬃcient for lead bricks. Adhesion, uniformity, and surface properties are main problem to be considered in choosing a proper way of coating. Plasma spray is cheaper than PVD. In either case, only a small amount of Aluminium per brick is required. Overall, Aluminium produces a very durable coating. The Aluminium coating can be ano- dised, if necessary, after application. This makes the coating harder and more corrosion resistant. If the coating is too thin, wearing would be a problem.
Another commercially available temporary coating is coating made of polyurethane. The coating dries very fast. This coating is char- acterised as a non-hazardous waste. Other organic polymer coatings include lead sheeting coated with 0.5 mm or 1.0 mm of vinyl.
On the other hand, there is an issue regarding the removal of a coating without transferring radioactive particulates because simple
movement of uncoated lead bricks generates enough airborne lead to expose a worker. Metal-coated surfaces are easier to clean than those coated with lead because metals used as coatings can produce hard, smooth surfaces while lead itself is soft, easy to scratch, and hard to clean. Previous study showed that simple cleaning, with an industrial solvent, can lower the surface count on selected surfaces to 100 K cm. Concerning polymer coatings, they can readily be removed and re- applied (Cournoyer, 2000).
4.3.Development of new lead-free radiation shielding materials
The use of lead shots makes the material toxic in nature and therefore, there is an urgent need to avoid the use of lead-based ma- terials for shielding applications, as it ranks second in the list of ha- zardous material. A study performed by Manish et al., developed an advanced non-toxic synthetic radiation shielding aggregate by ceramic processing of red mud. The novel process utilised industrial waste namely red mud and barium containing additives (Mann et al., 2016). From the reported novel work for the development of advanced, non-toxic, synthetic radiation shielding aggregate, a conclusion can be
Fig. 2. Comparison of lightweight gamma shielding materials. Retrieved from Timothy P Martinez and Cournoyer (2001).
Fig. 3. Variation of linear attenuation coeﬃcient (in cm) with photon energy in a range of 0.015-15 Mev for heavy metal oxide glasses; 70 BiO2: 30 SiO2, 70 BaO:30 SiO2, 70 Bi2O3:30 B2O3, 70 PbO:30 SiO2, and 10 ZnO:30 Bi2O3: 60 B2O3 (Retrieved from Singh et al., 2014).
drawn that combination of red mud, an Aluminium industry waste can be successfully used as resource material, for making highly value- added radiation shielding material. Furthermore, orthopaedic traumas caused by the weight of lead aprons have been reported in many studies (Klein et al., 2009; Moore and Novelline, 1992). As a result, several researchers attempted to design light lead free radiation shields for radiation protection (Zuguchi et al., 2008; McCaﬀrey et al., 2007; Webster and Ph, 1966; Yaﬀe et al., 1991). The proposed three-layered shield composed of tungsten, bismuth and gadolinium showed sig- niﬁcant attenuation properties with acceptable shielding at 140 keV energy in nuclear medicine.
The shielding properties of lead-free materials were investigated at photon energies that commonly used in diagnostic radiology and nu- clear medicine. Various single and multi-layered shields composed of barium, bismuth, gadolinium, tin and tungsten were simulated using Monte Carlo simulations to develop environment-friendly shields, which are lighter than conventional lead aprons. Based on the ﬁndings, the three-layered shields composed of tungsten, bismuth and gadoli- nium can be a proper substitute for lead in both diagnostic radiology and nuclear medicine (Zehtabian et al., 2015).
According to US Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), lead is the second substance of the top 20 hazardous substances list (Millstone et al., 1995). A study by performed by Dehghan et al., developed a new non-lead paint based on nano metal powder for radiation protection against X-ray and gamma radiation in Nuclear and Radiological department (Dehghan  et al., 2014). Diﬀerent nano metal powders were dispersed in epoxy paints to assess their attenuation properties. The study shows that layers made of 15% nano tungsten trioxide and 85% nano tin dioxide in an epoxy paint matrix can be considered as a non-toxic, resistant to erosion, lightweight and with widely applicable on the equipment and walls substitute for conventional lead shields.
4.4.Glasses used in shielding gamma rays
There are some drawbacks of using metals as radiation shielding material. Metals are not transparent to visible light. Thus, it restricts one to see through it. Nowadays, glasses prove to be promising alter- nates to the conventional shielding materials according to their extra- ordinary physical and chemical properties such as good transparency to visible light, high density, ease of fabrication, and non-toxicity. Bismuth
based systems are non-toxic and proved to be new possibility for lead free radiation shielding glasses (Kumar, 2017; Dong and Sayyed, 2017; Zoulfakar et al., 2017).
4.4.1.Bismuth barium/bismuth borate glasses
Several studies were performed on bismuth glass and barium glass as radiation shielding materials. These glasses have double functions of being transparent to visible light and gamma radiation absorbent. Bismuth and barium play an important role in radiation shielding glass with high possibility of replacing lead because of its environmental toxicity (Chanthima et al., 2017).
Bismuth borate glasses are environmentally friendly. These glasses are transparent to visible light and have low melting points. They have high density values and high refraction index (Kaundal, 2016). Results show that bismuth borate glasses can be an alternative radiation shielding material for gamma radiation. Borate glass properties such as density, moisture resistance, infrared optical transparency, rate of crystallisation and refractive indexed can be enhanced by doping it with heavy metals oxides such as bismuth oxides, BiO3, and molybdenum oxides, MoO3 (Sayyed et al., 2019).
A comparative study was conducted on radiation shielding proper- ties of silicate and borate heavy metal oxide glasses with lead. In this study, the type of heavy metal oxides used were silicate glasses (con- taining Bi2O3, BaO and PbO), bismuth borate glass and zinc bismuth borate glass. Results from this study show that these materials are very useful for gamma ray shielding and the best candidate for lead-free shielding material (V. P Singh et al., 2014).
Fig. 3 shows a result of variation of linear attenuation coeﬃcient (in cm) with photon energy in a range of 0.015–15 MeV for heavy metal oxide glasses. The ﬁgure shows that 70 Bi2O3:30 SiO2 glass has the largest attenuation value, followed by 70 Bi2O3:30 B2O3, 70  PbO:30 SiO2, and 10 ZnO:30 Bi2O3:60 B2O3 and the lowest attenuation value was the 70 BaO:30 SiO2 glass. It can be concluded that lead-free bis- muth silicate glass is a superior gamma radiation shielding glass that oﬀers identical shielding eﬀect to lead silicate and bismuth borate glasses. Therefore, lead-free bismuth borate glass with higher attenua- tion value is considered to be another suitable material for gamma radiation shielding (Singh et al., 2014).
4.4.2.Tellurite glasses
Lead-based glasses have begun to lose their popularity because of
their toxicity. Recent studies are moving towards synthesis of heavy metal oxide glasses, especially tellurite glasses for radiation shielding application. Tellurite glasses has high demand as a radiation shielding material due to its unique properties, such as nontoxicity, high density, high refractive index and high chemical resistance. Several studies showed that tellurite glasses have high radiation shielding eﬃciency. Moreover, an addition of WO3 or B2O3 can enhance this behaviour (Ersundu et al., 2017; Tekin et al., 2018). Tellurite glasses absorb gamma radiation more eﬃciently than concrete and lead glass (Gaikwad et al., 2018). Moreover, an increase in TeO2 content in glass will improve the gamma radiation shielding capability of the glasses.
4.5.Composites materials as gamma radiation shielding material
Lead is known for its toxicity to human and environmental. Composite materials are materials that consists of two or more sub- stances with diﬀerent physical and chemical characteristics (Ambika  et al., 2017; Singh et al., 2015). Polymer composites are non-toxic and environmentally friendly materials with light weight that make it a suitable material for radiation shielding (Atashi et al., 2018; Nambiar and Yeow, 2012). It has unique properties such as reasonable costs, high ﬂexibility, good mechanical strength, interesting optical and electrical properties. An experiment carried out by Zhong et al., was based on fabrication of ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene ﬁber reinforced Nano epoxy composites. This study shows that an addition of graphitic nanoﬁbers in the matrix gives a good impact on radiation shielding performance (Zhong et al., 2009). Polymer composites can be doped with materials of high atomic number other than lead. These composites have lower eﬀective density compared to lead but still it can provide suﬃcient protection against gamma radiation.
Another study shows that materials composed of hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, silicon, and gadolinium are known as carbohydrates-based compounds and they can be considered as new non-toxic radiation shielding materials. Based on the ﬁndings, a 2 mm thickness of the carbohydrates-based compound reduce up to 5% and 50% of 1 Mev and 35 keV energy respectively for the same thickness of lead (Keddy and Nam, 2015).
4.6.Alloys as radiation shielding materials
Alloy is a mixture of metals and other elements (Akman et al., 2018). Alloying enhance the speciﬁc characteristics and properties of metals. Thus, metallic alloys used as an alternative radiation shielding materials (Şakar and Kurudirek, 2019; Akman et al., 2019, Kaur et al., 2019). Alloys can be classiﬁed based on the base metal, compositions, and application as shown in Table 3.
Replacement of lead by tungsten-brass composites (pseudo alloy of W, Cu, and Zn) was performed to investigate an alternative material for lead in respect to material density (Ali Basheer Azeez et al., 2014). Results show that linear attenuation coeﬃcient increases with the in- crease in the tungsten weight percentage. Furthermore, samples with the high tungsten weight has the highest hardness values (Azeez et al., 2014).
5.conclusion
Radiation shielding eﬀectiveness depends upon the radiation en- ergy, type, and thickness of shielding material. In summary, high atomic number and high-density materials such as lead, tungsten and concrete provide best eﬀective shielding against gamma radiation against lead. This review study shows that there is an urgent need to ﬁnd alternative radiation shielding material to replace the lead.
Lead is a heavy metal which has been widely used in various in- dustrial and domestic settings, due to its physical and chemical prop- erties. However, lead has been classiﬁed as possible human carcinogen and its inorganic compounds as probable human carcinogens by the
International Agency for Research on Cancer. Nowadays, most of the work focus on lead-free radiation shielding material that can be used as gamma radiation shielding. There are variety of lead-free material that can be a suitable material for radiation shielding in nuclear medicine based on its cost-eﬀectiveness, practicality and physical properties.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from Universiti Sains Malaysia Bridging Grant (Account Number: 304/ CIPPT/6316267) and Universiti Sains Malaysia Fellowship for this study.