<title>Calculation of risk-based detection limits for radionuclides in the liquid effluents from Korean nuclear power plants</title>
<author>Jae Hak Cheong</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Nuclear Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do, </Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1331765</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2017.1331765</URL>
ABSTRACT
In order to review if present detection limits of radionuclides in liquid effluent from nuclear power plants are effective enough to warrant compliance with regulatory discharge limits, a risk-based approach is developed to derive a new detection limit for each radionuclide based on radiologi- cal criteria. Equations and adjustment factors are also proposed to discriminate the validity of the detection limits for multiple radionuclides in the liquid effluent with or without consideration of the nuclide composition. From case studies to three nuclear power plants in Korea with actual operation data from 2006 to 2015, the present detection limits have turned out to be effective for Hanul Unit 1 but may not be sensitive enough for Kori Unit 1 (8 out of 14 radionuclides) and Wol- song Unit 1 (9 out of 42 radionuclides). However, it is shown that the present detection limits for the latter two nuclear power plants can be justified, if credit is given to the radionuclide composi- tion. Otherwise, consideration should be given to adjustment of the present detection limits. The risk-based approach of this study can be used to determine the validity of established detection limits of a specific nuclear power plant.
KEYWORDS
Radioactivity; calculation; nuclear power plant; radioactive discharge; liquid eﬄuent; detection limit; risk-based approach
1.Introduction
Various radionuclides are discharged to the environ- ment in the form of liquid or gaseous effluents from operating nuclear power plants (NPPs). The discharge limits for radionuclides are usually included in an authorization issued by a regulatory body permitting the operation of an NPP [1]. The discharge limits are presented in various ways such as the concentration limits of radionuclides at restricted area boundary of an NPP (e.g. Bq/m3), the radioactivity limits released to the environment (e.g. Bq/y), and the radiation dose constraints (e.g. mSv/y).
At least in Germany, Japan, and the United States, the radiation dose constraints and the concentration lim- its of radionuclides are legal limits with which the NPP operator should comply. In Germany, the dose con- straints are applied to both liquid and airborne efflu- ents including the annual effective dose constraint of
0.3 mSv and the annual organ dose constraints lying within the range of 0.3–1.8 mSv [2]. The German Radia- tion Protection Ordinance also sets forth the maximum permissible activity concentration in water from radi- ation protection areas for each radionuclide. In Japan, radioactive material concentration limits outside the surrounding monitored area of an NPP were given in a notification issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Author- ity [3]. Dose objective of 0.05 mSv/y of effective dose equivalent both for liquid and airborne effluents was established in a safety review guide [4]. In the United States, Appendix I to 10 CFR Part 50 stipulates the
constraints of the annual dose or dose commitment from liquid effluents for any individual in an unre- stricted area from all pathways of exposure exceeding
0.03 mSv to the total body or 0.1 mSv to any organs [5]. Radionuclide-specific effluent concentration limits for water are addressed in Appendix B to 10 CFR Part    20 [6].
Also in Korea, the dose constraints for the liquid effluent from an NPP are set forth as 0.03 mSv/y of the effective dose and 0.1 mSv/y of the maximum equiva- lent dose to any organs [7]. The concentration limits of radionuclides in liquid effluent, referred to as effluent control limits (ECLs), at the restricted area boundary are also listed in the Nuclear Safety and Security Com- mission (NSSC) Notice No. 2016-16 as shown in Col- umn 2 of Table 1. The present dose constraints and val- ues of ECLs were substituted for the former discharge limits in 1998 and 2002, respectively, in order to adopt the 1990 Recommendations of the International Com- mission on Radiological Protection into the Korean regulations.
In order to keep all radioactive effluents below the discharge limits, NPP operators routinely take samples of radioactive effluent and measure the radioactivity of major radionuclides in accordance with the discharge authorization. The NPP operators should have adequate radioactivity detection capabilities for liquid effluent in order to demonstrate the compliance with the dose constraints and activity concentration limits. In this regard, the sensitivity requirements (i.e. detection
Table . Concentration limits at the restricted area boundary and detection limits of selected radionuclides for liquid eﬄu- ent from the Korean NPPs.
limits) for the measurement of radionuclides in radioactive effluent were established in Germany, Japan, and the United States [8–10]. In Korea, the NSSC established a priori detection limits for radioac- tivity measurement as shown in Column 3 of Table     1 [11]. The present detection limits for Korean NPPs were originally introduced to the Radiological Effluent Technical Specifications of the first commercial NPP in Korea, Kori Unit 1, which started its operation in 1978. Since then, the detection limits have been applied to all NPPs without significant change in Korea.
The concept of detection limit or similar term is also widely used in other industrial fields including envi- ronmental engineering. For instance, the Korean guide- lines applied to test hazardous waste set forth the values of the limit of quantification (or limit of reporting) for 14 types of hazardous materials ranging from 0.02% to 16.67% (average 2.86%) of the limiting concentrations of the materials [12].
If the sensitivity of radioactivity measurement is too low or the detection limit in terms of activity con- centration (Bq/m3) is very high, the discharge limits may be violated even though radionuclides are neither identified nor detected in the liquid effluent sample. In order for the NPP operators to show compliance with the discharge limits objectively, the detection limits for radioactivity measurement should be low (i.e. sensi- tive) enough. The adequacy of the prescribed detec- tion limits may vary depending upon the design and operational parameters such as the flow rates of dis- charged liquid radioactive waste and dilution water, and the environmental conditions such as the additional
larger than the concentrations limit in Korea. In this case, the specified detection limits may not result in radioactivity measurements good enough to show the compliance with the concentration limits unless the liquid radioactive effluent is diluted with additional water prior to discharge to the environment. Neverthe- less, there have been no specific deliberations reported on whether the prescribed radionuclide-specific detec- tion limits as shown in Table 1 are always sensitive  enough irrespective of the variable operating conditions of NPPs.
The United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (USNRC) stated its position to allow the adoption of a risk-informed approach to identify principal radionu- clides and the associated measurement sensitivity levels in Revision 2 of Regulatory Guide 1.21. In this context, a radionuclide may be considered as a principal radionu- clide if its contribution to the design objective dose set forth in 10 CFR Part 50, Appendix I or the total radioac- tivity of all radionuclides in the effluent is greater than 1% [13]. Thus, the NPP operators in the United States may not use the sensitivity levels specified in the reg- ulatory reports but may propose a new set of required sensitivity levels instead.
The first objective of this study is to develop a risk- based approach to derive the detection limits for the measurement of radionuclides in liquid effluent based on radiological discharge limits. This study also aims at applying the methodology to Korean NPPs with actual operation data and then evaluating if the present detection limits for liquid effluents are conservative enough to ensure conformance to the discharge limits in terms of dose constraints and concentration limits of radionuclides.
2.Methodology
2.1.Dilution of liquid effluent released from a discharge tank
Liquid radioactive waste generated and processed in an NPP is released from a discharge tank to the environ- ment as conceptually depicted in Figure 1.
The total radioactivity of a nuclide i in the liquid effluent discharged to the environment in a year (Ai in Bq/y) can be written as@1
where C0,i is the activity concentration of the radionu- clide i in the liquid waste discharge tank (Bq/m3) and f is the average flow rate of the liquid effluent (m3/y). The
Figure . Conceptual view of the release path of liquid radioactive eﬄuent at an NPP site.
liquid waste from the discharge tank is mixed with dilu- tion water onsite, prior to entering the receiving water body.
The concentration of the radionuclide i after dilution (CM,i in Bq/m3) is given as@2
where F is the dilution water flow rate (m3/y). When the diluted effluent flows into the receiving water body, it is further diluted with sea water or river water before reaching the point of receptors.
The concentration of the radionuclide i at the point of receptor (CR,i in Bq/m3) can be written by@3
where DFa is the additional dilution factor provided by the receiving water body.
2.2.Risk-based detection limit for a single radionuclide
... Compliance with radioactivity concentrationlimit
The value of CM,i in Equation (2) should not be larger than the ECL for a single radionuclide i in the liquideffluent at the restricted area boundary as [11]@4
where ECLi is the concentration limit for the radionu- clide i as given in Table 1 (Bq/m3).
On the other hand, the USNRC defines the lower limit of detection (LLD) as ‘the lowest concentration of radionuclide in a sample that will yield a net count, above system background, that will be detected with95% probability with only 5% probability of falsely con- cluding that a blank observation represents a real sig- nal.’ The LLD of a radionuclide in terms of Bq/m3 is cal- culated by the following equation for a particular mea- surement system [11]:
@5
where Sb is the standard deviation of the background counting rate (counts per minute), E is the counting efficiency (counts per disintegration), V is the sample volume (m3), (60) is the number of disintegrations per minute per Bq, Y is the fractional radiochemical yield, λ is the radioactive decay constant for the target radionu-clide (sec−1), and Ot is the elapsed time between the midpoint of sample collection and the time of counting (sec).
The sensitivity requirement in terms of the LLD is applied to the liquid waste in the discharge tank (i.e. C0,i). Provided the concentration of a radionuclide i in the discharge tank is at the level of LLDi, the following condition derived from Equations (2) and (4) should be met:
@6
where s is the safety factor (i.e. a small fraction of the discharge limit) for each radionuclide which provides confidence that CM,i will not exceed ECLi (i.e. 0 < s < 1). Equation (6) can be rearranged to represent the risk- based LLD for a single radionuclide i derived from its ECL (LLDECL,i) as@7
... Compliance with dose constraints
The International Atomic Energy Agency proposed an inequality for the discharge limits on the annual release of radioactivity to not exceed the dose constraints [1]. In this study, the inequality is rewritten for the dose con- straints as follows:@8
@9where (EDi)model and (ODi)model are the annual effective dose and the maximum organ equivalent dose, respec- tively, for the unit activity release rate of a radionuclide i (mSv/y per Bq/y), Ai is the total activity of the radionu- clide i released in a year (Bq/y), Econst,ED and Econst,OD are the effective dose and organ equivalent dose con-straints, respectively, for the liquid effluent (mSv/y), and
s is the safety factor to provide sufficient confidence that the dose constraint will not be violated. The values of (EDi)model and (ODi)model are usually calculated by an offsite dose assessment model.
With Equation (1) and the fact that LLDi is applica- ble to C0,i, Equations (8) and (9) can be rearranged as follows when the concentration of a single nuclide i in the discharge tank is at the level of its LLD derived from dose constrains:@10
@11
where LLDED,i and LLDOD,i are the LLD values for a single radionuclide i derived from dose constraints in terms of effective dose and maximum equivalent dose to any organs. The right-hand sides of Equations (10) and
(11) give the maximum values of LLDED,i and LLDOD,i, respectively, for each nuclide under the given safety factor s.
... Detection limit for a single radionuclide
If only a single radionuclide exists in the liquid effluent, the risk-based detection limit for a single radionuclide i (LLDRB,i) can be defined as the minimum value among LLDECL,i, LLDED,i, and LLDOD,i to be calculated from Equations (7), (10) and (11), respectively, as@12
2.3.Risk-based detection limits for the mixture of multiple radionuclides
When more than one radionuclides are present in the liquid effluent as in practice, the effect of the mix-  ture of multiple radionuclides should be also below the discharge limits. Accordingly, a set of values of LLDRB,i
calculated from Equation (12) may not be used directly as the final set of risk-based detection limits for the radionuclides mixture.
... When the radionuclide composition is not available
In accordance with the sum of fraction rule, the sum of the fractions of the value of CM,i over its ECLi should not be larger than unity for the mixture of radionuclides as [7]@13
From Equations (7), (12) and (13), the following expression can be derived as well:@14
where S is the safety factor for the overall effect from radionuclides mixture (i.e. 0 < s ≤ S < 1). For the mix- ture of multiple radionuclides, Equations (10) and (11) can be rewritten as follows:@15
@16
If all the conditions in Equations (14)–(16) are met with a safety factor S, the set of values of LLDRB,i calcu- lated from Equation (12) can be used as the final set of risk-based detection limits for the radionuclides mix- ture. Otherwise, LLDRB,i should be decreased by mul- tiplying an adjustment factor that can be calculated by dividing S by the maximum among the values of left- hand side (LHS) of Equations (14)–(16).As an alternative, on the other hand, an inequality (i.e. n·s ≤ S, where n is the number of radionuclides present in the liquid effluent) for a given S can be applied for the mixture of radionuclides instead of conducting the above manipulation and adjustment depending on whether all Equations (14)–(16) are met or not. How- ever, application of the inequality may cause the value of s to become too small when the number of radionu- clides present in the liquid effluent increases, and thus may reduce the operator’s flexibility in deriving and implementing the risk-based detection limits. There- fore, the inequality was not adopted in this study.
... When the radionuclide composition is available
If credible information on the composition of radionu- clides in the liquid effluent is available, the following equation can be applied instead of Equation (14):
@17where αi is the fraction of the activity of radionuclide i in the mixture, and k is the radionuclide of which the ratio of αi/LLDRB,i is the largest among all radionuclides and its concentration is assumed to be equal to LLDRB,k. The numerator part of each term in the summa- tion of the LHS of Equation (17) represents the activ- ity concentration of a nuclide i when the nuclide k is present at the level of its LLD in the liquid effluent. Divi- sion of the numerator part of each term in the summa- tion of the LHS of Equation (14) by that of Equation
(17)gives the term (LLDRB,i/αi)/(LLDRB,k/αk) havinga value greater than or equal to unity, which means the LHS of Equation (14) is not less than that of Equation (17). Therefore, the safety margin to meet the ECL  requirements for the radionuclides mixture is to be increased if the relative radionuclide composition is taken into account.
Similarly as in Equation (17), the following equa- tions can be applied instead of Equations (15) and (16) once the information on the nuclide composition of the liquid effluent is reflected:@18
@19
As shown with Equations (14) and (17), the LHS ofEquation (15) is always not less than that of Equation
(18)and the same relation is valid for Equations (16) and (19). Consequently, the safety margin to meet the dose constraints of the radionuclides mixture is to be also increased if the composition of nuclide is consid- ered in the calculation.2.4.Overall procedure to derive risk-based detection limits
The overall procedure of the proposed risk-based approach to derive the detection limits for the liquid effluent based on discharge limits and operation data of NPPs can be summarized as in Figure 2.
For the mixture of multiple nuclides, the con- centrations of radionuclides at the restricted area boundary and the offsite dose may be limited below a fraction of the discharge limits (i.e. ECLs and dose con- straints) by applying Equations (14)–(16) or Equations (17)–(19) without imposing restrictions on a single radionuclide by Equations (7) and (10)–(12). In this case, however, contribution of just a single dominant radionuclide present in the liquid effluent at the level of
LLD may contribute to a significant fraction (i.e. S S s) of the discharge limits in theory, and furthermore
nuclide-specific  risk-based  LLDs  cannot  be  derived
Figure . Flow chart to derive the detection limits for a single radionuclide or mixture of radionuclides based on the risk-based approach developed in this study.
Figure . Variations of dilution factors prior to release to the environment of liquid radioactive discharges from the Korean NPPs from
 to .
since Equations (7) and (10)–(12) are not applicable. In this study, therefore, the risk-based LLD for each radionuclide (LLDRB,i) is first derived as per the safety factor s, and then the set of LLDRB,i is accepted as the risk-based LLDs for multiple radionuclides if Equations (14)–(16) or Equations (17)–(19) are all met. When one or more of Equations (14)–(16) or Equations (17)–(19) are not satisfied, however, the set of LLDRB,i is adjusted to be the risk-based LLDs for multiple radionuclides as per the safety factor S in accordance with the procedure shown in Figure 2.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Representative liquid effluent discharge conditions for Korean NPPs
In order to derive the representative conditions of liquid effluents released from operating NPPs, the information on the annual volumes of liquid radioactive discharges and associated dilution water of 24 Korean NPPs from 2006 to 2015 were taken from a report published by the Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power Co. Ltd. [14]. Annual variation of dilution factors for liquid effluent prior to the release to the environment (i.e. f/F) of each Korean NPP was calculated from the operation data as shown in Figure 3.
The dilution factor (f/F) is generally larger than 5 102 in most cases as shown in Figure 3; however, some NPPs show much smaller dilution effect than others in certain periods. The dilution factor of Hanbit Units 3 and 4 was generally over 104  from 2006 to 2013,   but it decreased in 2014 and 2015 down to the mini- mum around 1.5 × 102. Since the design capacities of
water pumps providing dilution water and the num- ber of those operating pumps are kept almost constant in operation, the smaller value of the dilution factor can be attributed to the operation conditions where the larger volume of liquid radioactive waste was pro- duced and discharged than other normal periods of operation.
Table 2 shows the minimum, average, maximum, and five (5) percentile of the dilution factors of liquid effluent (f/F) for each Korean NPP, statistically calcu- lated from the operation data shown in Figure 3. The additional dilution factor (DFa) approved by the regula- tory body for each NPP site is also given in Table 2 [15]. It is noted that all Korean NPPs are located at coastal regions, the receiving water body of the liquid effluent is the sea rather than the river; hence, the liquid effluent does not contribute to the internal radiation exposure through drinking water pathway.
For conservatism, 5 percentile of the dilution fac- tor and the annual average volume of liquid radioactive effluent discharged from 2006 to 2015 were assumed to be ‘the representative liquid effluent discharge con- dition’ for a specific unit of NPP. It was also assumed that the volume of liquid effluent from one unit of NPP is one-half of the volume reported for the two units of adjacent NPPs under the control of the same operating organization, because the radioactive waste produced from the two units is treated and discharged through the radioactive waste processing systems shared by them. That is, the liquid effluent discharge data for Kori Unit 1 was calculated by dividing the discharge data for Kori Units 1 and 2 by two (2).
The following three Korean NPPs were selected for case studies to derive the risk-based detection limits and
Table . Statistics of the dilution factor of liquid eﬄuent prior to release to the envi- ronment (f/F) along with the additional dilution factor (DFa) of the Korean NPPs from to verify the adequacy of the present sensitivity require- ments:
(1)Kori Unit 1: the oldest pressurized water reactor (PWR) in Korea started operation in 1978.
(2)Hanul Unit 1: the NPP showing the largest dilu- tion factor (f/F) for the period of 2006–2015.
(3)Wolsong Unit 1: the oldest pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) in Korea being operated since 1982.
3.2.Case study I – Kori Unit 1
As shown in Table 3, 14 radionuclides such as tri- tium (3H), radioactive strontium (89Sr and 90Sr), and
11 gamma-emitting radionuclides were detected in the liquid effluent from Kori Unit 1 in the period of 2006–2015. Table 3 also shows the values of (EDi)model and (ODi)model calculated by an offsite dose calcula- tion computer code, Integrated Dose Assessment Code package (INDAC) for the representative liquid effluent discharge condition of Kori Unit 1 as mentioned above. The INDAC code was developed by Korea Institute  of
Table . Radioactivity in liquid eﬄuents released from Kori Unit
 from  to  and the expected annual eﬀective dose and maximum organ equivalent dose per unit activity calculated under the representative liquid eﬄuent discharge conditions.Nuclear Safety and has been widely used to estimate the radiation dose due to liquid and gaseous effluents to the public around the Korean NPPs [16].
The conceptual view of  the  exposure  pathways  for liquid radioactive effluent from the Korean NPPs reflected in INDAC code is shown in Figure 4.
Figure . Simpliﬁed view of the radiation exposure pathways for liquid radioactive eﬄuent from the Korean NPPs reﬂected in INDAC code.
Figure . Present LLDs and the risk-based LLDs calculated in this study for Kori Unit .
In this study, the safety factors s and S can be decided as necessary at least if the basic condition (i.e. 0 < s ≤ S
< 1) is fulfilled. In the practical regulatory activities, the regulatory body usually establishes the required detec- tion limits as a fraction of applicable limits or guideline levels. In relevant nuclear regulatory documents on the measurement of radiation or radioactivity, a few cases were found that the required detection limits were set to 1%, 10%–50% of the limiting or guideline levels in practice [13,17,18]. Therefore, the initial assumptions of the values of s and S were made to be 0.01 and 0.1, respectively, in the case studies.
Thus, by assuming the safety factor for a single radionuclide, s = 0.01 (i.e. 1%), LLDECL, LLDED, and LLDOD were derived for the radionuclides discharged from Kori Unit 1 using Equations (7), (10), and (11), respectively, as shown in Figure 5. It was found that the present LLDs for eight radionuclides (54Mn, 58Co, 60Co, 95Nb, 95Zr, 110mAg, 124Sb, and 125Sb) should be decreased in order to demonstrate the discharge of a single radionuclide in the liquid effluent at the level LLD may not cause radiological effect in excess of 1% of the relevant discharge limits (i.e. radioactivity concentra- tion limits and dose constraints). The minimum value among LLDECL, LLDED, and LLDOD for a radionuclide in Figure 5 is the risk-based LLD for the nuclide as proposed in Equation (12).
For the mixture of radionuclides, it was assumed that the safety factor S = 0.1 (i.e. 10%). The assump- tion would be reasonable to guarantee that the dis- charge of the radionuclides mixture in the liquid efflu- ent at the levels of risk-based  LLDs  as  above  may not induce radiological effect larger than 10% of the corresponding discharge limits. The values of LHS of Equations (14) and (15) as shown in Table 4 are less than 0.1, which means the multiple radionuclides dis- charge at the levels of the newly derived risk-based  LLDs may neither induce the radioactivity concen- tration exceeding 10% of the ECLs for the mixture  nor the effective dose exceeding 10% of the dose constraint.
The LHS of Equation (16) is slightly in excess of  0.1, which implies multiple radionuclides discharge at the levels of the risk-based LLDs of all radionuclides present in the liquid effluent may induce the maximum organ dose higher than 10% of the dose constraint.  Therefore, the risk-based LLDs for radionuclides would be adjusted by multiplying an adjustment factor (i.e.   S divided by the maximum among the values of LHS of Equations (14)–(16)) to the derived risk-based LLD for each nuclide, where there  is  no  confidence  on the composition of radionuclides. From Table 4, the adjustment factor (Fad) is calculated to be 9.01 × 10−1 (= 0.1/(1.11 × 10−1)).Table . Radioactivity in liquid eﬄuent released from Hanul Unit  in
– and the annual eﬀective dose and maximum organ equiva- lent dose per unit activity released calculated under the representative liquid eﬄuent discharge conditions.
Table . Compliance of the eﬀect of mixture of radionuclides with the safety factor (S = .) for Kori Unit .
If credible information on the nuclide composition is available as shown in Table 3, the risk-based LLDs can be justified by showing that the values of LHS of Equations (17)–(19) are less than 0.1 and much smaller than the values of LHS of Equations (14)–(16), respec- tively. That means the information on radionuclide composition may further increase the safety margin to comply with the discharge limits. Moreover, the adjust- ment of the risk-based LLDs proposed from the value of LHS of Equation (16) in excess of 0.1 is not needed, if the credit is given to the radionuclide composition.
Table 4 also shows the calculation results of whether the current levels of LLDs adopted  at  Kori  Unit  1 are sufficient to demonstrate the compliance of the  mixture of radionuclides with the discharge limits. It can be said that the present LLDs are always sensitive enough to show the conformance to 10% of the con- centration limits; nevertheless, they may not be sensi- tive enough to show the conformance to 10% of the two dose constraints. As shown in Table 4, the present LLDs can be justified with the information on the rela- tive radionuclide composition however. Otherwise, the operators may consider adjusting the present LLDs by
multiplying an adjustment factor (Fad) of 1.33 × 10−1 (= 0.1/(7.54 × 10−1)).
3.3.Case study II – Hanul Unit 1
Five radionuclides including tritium (3H) and four gamma-emitting radionuclides were detected in the liq- uid discharges from Hanul Unit 1 from 2006 to 2015 (see Table 5).
The values of LLDECL, LLDED, and LLDOD shown  in Figure 6 were calculated from Equations (7), (10), and (11), respectively, in the same way as in Figure 5. Figure 6 shows that the present LLDs for five radionu- clides adopted at Hanul Unit 1 are below the risk-based LLDs derived for the radionuclides as well. That is, the present levels of LLDs are sufficient enough to ensure the discharge of a single radionuclide in the liquid efflu- ent at the level LLD may not cause radiological effect larger than 1% of the relevant discharge limits (i.e. s = 0.01).
It can be said that the discharge of the mixture of radionuclides all of which are present at the levels of
Figure . Present LLDs and the risk-based LLDs calculated in this study for Hanul Unit .
Table . Compliance of the eﬀect of mixture of radionuclides with the safety factor (S = .) for Hanul Unit .	risk-based LLDs or present LLDs at Hanul Unit 1 may not cause radiological effect larger than 10% of the rel- evant discharge limits (i.e. S = 0.1). If the radionuclide composition of the liquid effluent can be assumed to be constant as in Table 5, the safety margin for complying with the discharge limits increases since the LHS values of Equations (17)–(19) are smaller than the LHS values of Equations (14)–(16), respectively (see Table 6).
3.4.
Case study III – Wolsong Unit 1
As shown in Table 7, 42 radionuclides ranging from tri- tium (3H), radioiodines (131I and 133I), and 39 gamma- emitting radionuclides were identified in the liquid dis- charges from Wolsong Unit 1 for the last 10 years. The number of radionuclides detected at the Wolsong Unit 1 is much higher than those for Kori Unit 1 and Hanul
Table . Radioactivity in liquid eﬄuent released from Wolsong Unit  in
– and the annual eﬀective dose and maximum organ equivalent dose per unit activity released calculated under the representative liquid eﬄuent discharge conditions.
Figure . Present LLDs and the risk-based LLDs calculated in this study for Wolsong Unit .
Unit 1, which can be ascribed to the design features of the liquid radioactive waste processing systems at the NPPs. That is, evaporators with very high decontami- nation factors for particulate radionuclides are installed at the two PWRs (Kori Unit 1 and Hanul Unit 1); how- ever, only conventional ion exchangers are installed at the PHWR, Wolsong Unit 1.
Figure 7 shows the calculated values of LLDECL, LLDED, and LLDOD derived from Equations (7), (10), and (11), respectively, in comparison with the values of the present LLDs for 42 radionuclides adopted in Wol- song Unit 1. Figure 7 implies that the present levels of LLDs for nine radionuclides (54Mn, 59Fe, 60Co, 65Zn, 95Nb, 131I, 132Te, 144Ce, and 203Hg) may not be sufficient to demonstrate the compliance with 1% of the relevant discharge limits to be caused by a single radionuclide.
The LHS of Equation (14) calculated using the risk- based LLDs defined in Equation (12) is smaller than
0.1 as shown in Table 8. Thus, the radioactivity con- centration of the liquid discharge containing multiple radionuclides all of which activity concentrations are the same with the risk-based LLDs may not exceed  10% of the ECL for the radionuclides mixture. The  calculated values of LHS of Equations (15) and (16) are larger than 0.1, which implies that the risk-based LLDs derived in this study may not ensure compliance with the dose constraints unless the information on the
composition of radionuclides is available. The derived risk-based LLDs can be justified by multiplying an adjustment factor (Fad) of 3.68 × 10−3 (= 0.1/(2.72 × 10 )) without consideration of the nuclide composi- tion. On the other hand, the values of LHS of Equations
(17)and (18) in Table 8 are much smaller than the safety factor S of 0.1, which means that the derived risk- based LLDs can be also justified without adjustment  if credible information on the nuclide composition is available.
Moreover, Table 8 shows whether the current levels of LLDs are sensitive enough to ensure the compliance of radionuclides mixture with the discharge limits. It can be said that the present LLDs are always sensitive to comply with 10% of the concentration limits; neverthe- less, they may not be sensitive enough to comply with 10% of the constraints of the effective dose and maxi- mum organ dose.
Table 8  also  shows  that  the  present  LLDs  can  be justified with the information on the relative radionuclide composition.  Therefore,  the  opera-  tors may think of taking one of the following two measures as
(1)adjustment of the present levels of LLDs for  radionuclides by multiplying an adjustment fac- tor (Fad) of 2.14 × 10−2 (= 0.1/(4.67 × 100)); or
Table . Compliance of the eﬀect of mixture of radionuclides with the safety factor (S = .) for Wolsong Unit .
(2)justification  of  the  present  levels  of  LLDs  by demonstrating that the values of LHS of Equations (18) and (19) are less than 0.1 using acceptable information on the composition of radionuclides present in the liquid effluent.
4.Conclusion
Using the methodology proposed in this study, the risk- based detection limit for a single radionuclide in liquid effluent can be derived from operation data of an NPP under the given safety factor assumed to ensure compli- ance with the regulatory discharge limits. For the NPPs at which various radionuclides are detected in the liquid effluent, the risk-based detection limit derived for each radionuclide cannot be directly used for the mixture of radionuclides since the sum of fraction rule may not be satisfied for the mixture. It was shown that the derived risk-based detection limits can be adjusted by multiply- ing an adjustment factor (Fad) as proposed in this study or the risk-based detection limits themselves can be jus- tified by taking into account the relative nuclide compo- sition of the liquid effluent.
Through case studies, the operation data from three Korean NPPs in the period of 2006–2015 show rela- tively large variations in dilution factor (i.e. 4.41 × 102–
7.34× 103 of 5 percentile of f/F) and in the number  of radionuclides detected in the liquid effluent (i.e. 5– 42). Under such variable dilution conditions of liquid effluent and composition of radionuclides, the present detection limits for 8 out of 14 radionuclides detected in Kori Unit 1 and 9 out of 42 radionuclides detected in Wolsong Unit 1 showed not enough sensitivity to demonstrate compliance with the discharge limits. In such cases, the operators may recalculate the risk-based radionuclide-specific detection limits by introducing an adjustment factor, or demonstrate the validity of the detection limits for multiple radionuclides considering nuclide composition in accordance with the methodol- ogy proposed in this study.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from Kyung Hee Univer- sity [grant number KHU-20161375] in 2016.
