<title>Enhancing long-term biodegradability and UV-shielding performances of transparent polylactic acid nanocomposite films by adding cellulose nanocrystal-zinc oxide hybrids</title>
<author>Yan Yan Wang a, Hou-Yong Yu a,c,⇑, Lili Yang a, Somia Yassin Hussain Abdalkarim a,b, Wei-Lai Chen a</author>
<Affiliation>a The Key Laboratory of Advanced Textile Materials and Manufacturing Technology of Ministry of Education, Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Fiber Materials and Manufacturing Technology, College of Materials and Textiles, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 310018, China
b Zhejiang Institute of Technology and Automatic Control, College of Mechanical and Automatic Control, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 310018, China
c Department of Chemical Engineering, Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.09.062</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.09.062 </URL>
ABSTRACT
We investigated UV-shielding performances and biodegradation abilities under controlled hydrolytic, soil burial, and thermal conditions of transparent polylactic acids (PLA) nanocomposite films embedded with cellulose nanocrystal-zinc oxide (CNC-ZnO) hybrids. By adding high content of 15wt %CNC-ZnO hybrids into the PLA matrix, the highest UV radiation was blocked out by (85.31%) of UV-A and (95.90%) of UV-B. It is found that the weight loss of PLA nanocomposites after being hydrolytic degraded for 70 days increased from 9% for PLA to 25% with 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids. Meanwhile, in soil burial test, pure PLA shows smallest degradation rate with only 8% weight loss after 110 days, while the PLA nanocompos- ite film with 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids was degraded by about 28%. Besides, the resultant degradation byproducts from the thermally-decomposed catalysis have been identified by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR). Moreover, the morphologies and appearances changes during the hydrolytic and soil degradation of PLA nanocomposite films were evaluated. This study is expected to provide meaning- ful insights into nanocomposite films embedded with CNC-ZnO hybrids as a result of contourable degradation and high ultraviolet protection factor value (UPF).
Keywords:
Cellulose nanocrystal hybrids Nanocomposite film Degradation abilities
1.Introduction
It well known that food packaging materials are mainly synthe- sized by petroleum-based plastics, which are difficult to be degraded in the natural environment and bring great pressure to the environment [1]. Recently, with an increasing lack of petroleum-based plastic sources, the study of biodegradable bio- based materials has become significant attention for researchers around the globe [2–4]. Among the renewable source-based biodegradable polymer, poly lactic acid (PLA) is the presently rec- ognized as unique and most attractive biodegradable polymers and has been extensively used in some short-lived applications in food industries for disposable products [5,6], mainly due to advantages of PLA, such as high transparency, easy processing, good biocom- patibility, and good physicochemical properties [6]. In spite of all these advantages of PLA, there are also various drawbacks that make PLA unsuitable for some application, such as slow and uncontrollable degradation rate, poor heat resistance,  low  strength, and crystallinity [7,8].
Hence, improving biodegradation ability of PLA biopolymer is necessary for food industries, especially in food packaging materi- als, since that the materials have to meet controllable and fast degradation requirements to lengthen the shelf life of PLA [9,10]. Moreover, in nature the degradation of PLA produces by hydrolytic or enzymatic chain scission of the ester bonds to low molecular weight oligomers and monomers, allowing modulation by microorganisms [11,12]. The degradation of PLA in the soil is mainly erosion, while abiotic hydrolysis was proposed as a key depolymerization mechanism or volumetric degradation  [13]. Here, different approaches have been proved that internal auto- catalysis of PLA causes ester-group fracture, leading to carboxylic acid and thus lowering the pH of the degrading medium [14]. Besides, during the thermal treatment of PLA, the existence of  weak hydrolysable linkages could make material suffer from sensi- tivity after espouse to heat and moisture, which could cause degra- dation and molecular weight reduction [15]. In this context, the degradations mechanism of PLA is still a matter for further
research, subsequently, it is described that random chain scission occurs either in acid or in basic mediums. The most effective meth- ods to enhance the degradation ability of PLA is to use various pro- cessing approaches such as blending at an early stage, copolymerization, plasticizing, and addition of nanofillers  [16]. The studies in this area continue to regulate and accelerate the degradation behaviors of PLA nanocomposites. For example, Luo et al., studied the biodegradation ability of PLA/TiO2 nanocompos- ites under controlled composting conditions for 90 days [17]. Their results showed that the rapid increase of crystallinity  indicated that the PLA and PLA/TiO2 nanocomposites had heterogeneous degradation mechanisms. Lizundia et al. has shown that the addi- tion of zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) could be noticeably enhanced hydrolytic degradation of polylactide acid by the interac- tion of hydrogen ion in H2O separation with ZnO oxygen position sites and the attack of this new hydroxyl groups to the PLA ester bonds, resulted in decreased pH values of the phosphate buffer solution medium (PBS) [18]. Accordingly, it can be suggested that the synergistic effect of ZnO NPs into the PLA matrix could produce nanocomposite with modulated degradation abilities.
More significantly, zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) are consid- ered to be as safe materials with a high absorber of UV radiation and have been accepted by the American Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [19,20]. Serval studies have been reported that ZnO nanopar- ticles have a tendency to agglomeration due to their high surface energy; consequently, the aligned of ZnO in a polymeric matrix would be complicated especially with high loading content [21]. Therefore; in order to reduce the ZnO agglomeration, we have reported on our previous work, the using of cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) with high strength and nanometric size as a green carrier to fabricate Zinc oxide (CNC-ZnO) hybrids as green nanofillers [22]. Also, we have reported using of the synergistic effect of CNC-ZnO hybrids into biopolyester, resulting in remarkable improvement in mechanical and thermal properties, strong antimicrobial properties, and ultra-high UV-shielding performance for the resultant nanocomposite [23,24]. While we have investigated the hydrolytic degradation behavior of biopolyester, the results of this study proved that by using CNC-ZnO hybrids as synergistic effect into poly(3- hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)(PHBV) can control the hydrolytic degradation behavior of PHBV nanocomposites, but the biodegradation study was carried out only for short -term (7 days) [25]. To the best of our knowledge, no reports are obtainable to date in literature on a comprehensive study of long-term biodegradability under hydrolytic, soil, thermal conditions and UV-shielding proper- ties of CNC-ZnO hybrids loaded PLA nanocomposite film.
Accordingly, it could be expected that the dispersion of CNC- ZnO hybrids into PLA can control the degradation kinetic of PLA nanocomposite and CNC-ZnO hybrids could provide UV-shielding of the nanocomposites. In the present work, we aim to study both hydrolytic, soil, thermal degradation mechanisms of PLA/CNC-ZnO nanocomposite films that block most of the ultraviolet radiation. Also, the morphological, weight loss, and appearance changes of PLA nanocomposite films after hydrolytic and soil degradations have been systematically explored by scanning electron micro- scopy (FE-SEM) and visual analysis. It is expected that the combi- nation of CNC-ZnO hybrids into PLA makes the hybrids great candidates to develop multifunctional nanocomposites that may cover an extensive variety of degradation rates for potential food packaging and biomedical applications.
2.Experimental section
2.1.Materials
Commercial Microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) size about (20 lm)  was  purchased  from  and  kindly  supplied  by  Shanghai
Chemical Reagents (Shanghai, China), Ltd. Polylactic acid (PLA, Mn = 1.0    105) was supplied by Bright China Industrial Co. Ltd.    as received without purification. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) was pro- vided by Hangzhou Shuanglin Chemical Reagent Company. The citric acid (C6H8O7) was purchased from Hangzhou Gaojing Fine Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. Chloroform CHCl3, and ethanol (C2H5OH) was purchased from Guoyao Group Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Zinc chloride [ZnCl2] and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) was purchased from Tianjin Yongda Chemical Reagent Company. All materials and reagents were used as received without further purification.
2.2.Preparation of CNC-ZnO hybrids films
Cellulose nanocrystals (CNC) were prepared by mixed acid hydrolysis of microcrystalline cellulose (MCC). CNC were prepared according to our previous preparation method [23]. In brief about   3 g of MCC introduced into 150 mL of a mixed acid aqueous solu- tion containing 3 M C6H8O7 and 6 M HCl with (volume fraction is
90% C6H8O7/10%), at 80 °C for 6 h. The resultant solution was neu-
tralized with NaOH solution, centrifuged at12000 rpm for 10 min)
and washed with deionized water for several times until the pH reached 7. Finally, a CNC suspension with a solid (CNC) content  of  4.5 g/L  was  achieved  [24].  For  CNC-ZnO  hybrids,  about  (5.0 mmol) ZnCl2, 10 g CNC suspension, and NaOH (15.0 mmol), were added into screw-capped glass vials, then the mixture was added to 25 mL deionized water with strong stirring at room tem-
perature. After that stored at 80 °C in the oven for 24 h. Further,
CNC-ZnO hybrids were centrifuged with deionized water and etha-
nol for many times. Finally, the as-prepared CNC-ZnO hybrids were allowed to dry in an oven at 60 °C for 12 h.
2.3.Fabrication  of  nanocomposite films
PLA/CNC-ZnO nanocomposite films were obtained through sim- ple solution casting method. 10 wt% of the PLA was dissolved in chloroform and stirred for 30 min at 40 °C to obtain a uniform solu-
tion. After that CNC-ZnO hybrids with various content (3,5,10, and
15 wt%) based on the PLA weight dissolved in chloroform and then mixing ultrasonic for 30 min, the designated percentages of PLA and CNC-ZnO for fabrication of composite films were provided in Table S1, the mixture solutions were stirred at ambient conditions for 24 h  until uniform dispersion  was obtained, and then  the solu-
tion was uniformly coated on the glass slide and further  dried at  40 °C overnight. Finally, PLA nanocomposite films were obtained with  a  thickness  of  30–45 lm.  Additionally,  the  morphologies
and properties of the nanocomposite films were characterized using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM), Four- ier transforms infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), Ultraviolet-visible (UV–vis) spectrophotometer, Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA), Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), etc., and these characteri- zations are provided in Supporting Information.
2.4.In vitro degradation behavior
The   PLA   nanocomposite   films   were   cut   into   rectangles (3  3 cm2),  each  sample  was  sealed  in  a  test  tube  and  kept  in 30 mL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH = 7.4) and tempera-
ture of 37 °C for 70 days under constant shaking of 120 rpm,  the
samples were removed every 5 or 10 days and then dried them
after washed with deionized water. The results of triplicate runs were used to calculate the weight of the dried samples, and the percentage of weight loss was calculated using the following eq. 1:@1
where m0 is the initial mass, mt is the mass after a given time of degradation.
2.5.Soil burial degradation behavior
In order to simulate the degradation process of nanocomposite films under natural conditions, samples were cut into rectangles with an area of 50 to 70 cm2. The samples were naturally degraded under the cypress trees of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University in the soil about 10 cm deep from the ground. Samples were taken out every  5 days, 10 days or 20 days. After washing and drying, the weight and size of the samples were measured. The percentage of weight loss was calculated using the above eq. (1).
2.6.Thermal degradation analysis
The thermal degradation behavior was recorded using on a NETZSCH TG 209 F1 thermogravimetric analyzer and Fourier trans- forms infrared spectrometer (TG/FT-IR), the TG outlet was coupled
with the spectrometer through a gas cell, which was heated to 200 °C and stabilized for 4 h before the running of TG. The thermal degradation was carried out under a nitrogen atmosphere over a range of 30–600 °C at a scan rate of 10 °C min—1 with a flow rate of 30 mL/min while the IR spectra were reordered. The results of
triplicate runs were achieved.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Morphology analysis
The morphology structure of CNC-ZnO hybrids was character- ized by TEM and FE-SEM (Fig. 1, and Fig. S1, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1the hydroxyl group on the surface of CNC interacted with Zn2+ ions by strong electrostatic interaction [22], resulting in the sheet-like structure of CNC-ZnO hybrids and uniform size distribu- tion with diameter of 210 ± 10.5 nm, length of 440 ± 22 nm and a sheet thickness of 40–80 nm (Fig. S1). Also, FE-SEM photographs  of pure PLA film and PLA/CNC-ZnO nanocomposites and their
Fig. 1. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of CNC-ZnO hybrids, and FE-SEM photographs and surface topography of pure PLA and nanocomposite films with various CNC-ZnO contents of 3, 5, 10 and, 15 wt%; (inset shows cross-section images of pure PLA and nanocomposite films with 3 and 15 wt% CNC-ZnO).
cross-sections are illustrated in Fig. 1. It was clear that the CNC- ZnO hybrids dispersed randomly in the PLA matrix. Relatively homogeneous dispersion of CNC-ZnO were visible in the nanocom- posite films with low contents of CNC-ZnO hybrids (3 wt%), but with high loading contents (15 wt%), some of CNC-ZnO hybrids found on the surface of nanocomposites making the surface rougher; suggesting the aggregation of CNC-ZnO and poorly dis- tributed with PLA, as provided in the cross-section photographs (See insert in Fig. 1). In addition, energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDX) results approve that various contents of CNC-ZnO hybrids were successfully introduced into the PLA matrix (Fig. S2). The attendance of carbon, oxygen, and zinc in the EDX spectrum con- firmed the presence of CNC-ZnO hybrids on the composite films. With the increase of CNC-ZnO content, the atom proportion of zinc element on the nanocomposite increased.
3.2.Crystal and chemical structures
The crystallization property of CNC and CNC-ZnO hybrids were characterized by wide-angle X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig.  S3,  typical  characteristic  peaks  of  CNC  at  2h = 14.8°,  16.5°,
22.7°, and 34.2° which was corresponding to the cellulose I [24].
In the XRD pattern of CNC-ZnO hybrids, significant new diffraction peaks  at  31.8°,  34.4°,  36.3°,  47.5°,  56.6°,  62.9°,  68.0°,  and  69.2°
appeared  which  could  be   attributed  to  characteristic  planes   of
hexagonal wurtzite structure of ZnO. The existence of these new
peaks in CNC-ZnO hybrids confirmed that both CNC and ZnO are existing in the hybrids.
The chemical interactions of PLA nanocomposites were studied by Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FT-IR) to explore the effect of CNC-ZnO hybrids in the chemical interactions of the PLA matrix (Fig. 2). The illustrative peaks of CNC and ZnO were found in the CNC-ZnO hybrids spectrum as shown in Fig. 2a. FT-IR spec- trum of CNC-ZnO hybrids showed various characteristics peaks, for examples; the peak at 3345 cm—1 for stretching of hydroxyl groups, peak at around 1059 cm—1 for the CAOAC stretching of pyranose and glucose ring skeletal vibration, and at 445 cm—1 was assigned to ZnAO stretching (Fig. 2a) [26]. The pure PLA exhibited peaks    in the range of 3700-3375 cm—1 which can be attributed to a vari- ety of existing forms of OAH bond, mainly intermolecular and intramolecular hydrogen bonds [27]. From Fig. 2b the demonstra- tive peaks of CNC-ZnO hybrids, and PLA was clearly apparent in the PLA nanocomposite films. It was noticeable that a broad peak at was 3345 cm—1 corresponding to free hydroxyl in CNC, and new peak at around 452 cm—1 appeared in  the  nanocomposite  films can be attributed to ZnAO stretching, which demonstrated that CNC-ZnO were effectively introduced to PLA matrix [21,23]. The peak at about 1753 cm—1 can be attributed to the  hydrogen-  bonded of the C = O groups and free carbonyl group appeared at the 1762 cm—1 [28,29]. As shown in Fig. 2b,  the  peak  between  3700 and 3375 cm—1 is a variety of existing forms of OAH bond, mainly intermolecular and intramolecular hydrogen bond. Thedata in the infrared spectrogram (Fig. 2a) were obtained by Gauss/ Lorentz curve function fitting from 1850 to 1650 cm—1 to calculate the hydrogen bond fraction (FH-CO), which is recorded in Table 1. The FH-CO values were calculated by the following Eq. [30]:@2
Fig. 2. (a) FT-IR spectrum of CNC-ZnO; (b) the infrared spectra of for pure PLA and the composite films with various CNC-ZnO content (c) infrared spectrum of carbonyl stretching region; (d) curve fitting of 1650–1850 cm—1 for nanocomposite with 10 wt% CNC-ZnO.
where AH and Aa are the peak areas of the free and hydrogen bonded components, respectively, and rH/a is 1.36 for semi-quantitative comparison objectives based on a minimal error. From Fig. 2c by using high loading of CNC-ZnO hybrids, the stretching vibration range of  carbonyl  group  moved  from  1749 cm—1  of  PLA  to  1753 cm—1 of 15 wt%. In addition, the ratio of the free hydroxyl group increases slightly, and the area of carbonyl peak becomes large. It can be seen from the hydrogen bond fraction in Table 1 that the value increases from 0.25 to 0.27 with adding of CNC-ZnO from 5 wt% to 15 wt%. It can be recommended that the addition of CNC- ZnO could greatly affect the intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions in the nanocomposite films, which can promote the interface adhesion, thus enhancing some properties of the compos- ite films.
3.3.Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and spherulite morphology
Thermal analyses of PLA nanocomposite samples have been investigated by using the DSC technique. DSC curves recorded in the first cooling run of pure PLA and the PLA nanocomposite films with various CNC-ZnO contents (Fig. 3) shows no obvious melt- crystallization peaks (Tmc) were found in pure PLA or PLA nanocomposites (Fig. 3a). In the second heating run, pure PLA still had no cold crystallization peak (Tcc), but in PLA nanocomposites films with various CNC-ZnO contents, the cold crystallization peaks
Table 1
Hydrogen bond fractions (FH—CO), Percentage of Blocking from UV-A and UV-B radiation and UPF values of pure PLA and PLA nanocomposite films with various CNC- ZnO hybrids content.
appeared (Fig. 3b). It is found that the Tcc value was reduced as the CNC-ZnO content increased (Table 2). This could be due to that CNC-ZnO hybrids can act as a nucleating agent when it is added into PLA matrix can reduce intermolecular forces, making the molecular chain easy to move, and decrease the cold crystallization temperature. This result is an agreement with previous literature; which has been found that cellulose nanocrystal acts as a nucleat-ing agent, promoting a faster crystallization of PLA [30]. Using of the low or high content of CNC-ZnO hybrids (3–15 wt%) did not affect the glass transition temperature (Tg) and melting tempera- ture (Tm) of PLA nanocomposite films when was compared with pure PLA. This behavior could be due to that the size PLA crystal phases were limited by increased CNC-ZnO content and an agglomeration of CNC-ZnO can weaken this effect by reduced the intermolecular interactions between the two components. How- ever; the melting temperature (Tm), enthalpy of cold crystallization (DHcc)   and   melting   enthalpies   (DHm)   of   PLA   nanocomposite
increased with adding of CNC-ZnO. The pure PLA showed one melt- ing peak (Tm1 = 165.2 °C), but with adding of high content of 10 wt
%  and  15 wt%  CNC-ZnO,  the  obtained  PLA  nanocomposites show
two melting peaks (Tm1, Tm2), and Tm2 is defined as real melting temperature for PLA nanocomposite films, with 10 wt% of CNC- ZnO the (Tm) value increased to 168.1 °C. As results the degree of
crystallinity (Xc) recorded higher value by adding 10 wt% of CNC-
ZnO, the degree of crystallinity increased from 20.2% to 40.0% (Table 2). It suggested that such CNC-ZnO hybrids are helpful to improve the heat resistance and solvent erosion resistance of the nanocomposite films.
The spherulite morphologies of PLA and its PLA nanocomposites were studied by using polarized optical microscopic (POM) and the POM images are presented in Fig. S4. It is obvious that tiny spher-
ulites begun to appear at the isothermal crystallization tempera- ture of 110 °C, and the spherulites reached to maximum after isothermal annealing for 4 min. It is found that the dimensions of
pure PLA spherulites were larger compared with PLA nanocompos- ites with various CNC-ZnO hybrids. This could be due to the low nucleation density of pure PLA. However, as the content of CNC- ZnO hybrids increased the dimensions of PLA nanocomposites spherulites decreased. After 4 min annealing, pure PLA was becom- ing full of spherulites; their spherulites size was larger than those in the nanocomposites. The PLA nanocomposites with various CNC-ZnO contents showed the heterogeneous nucleating effect and can modulate PLA crystal, as result spherulites size decreased for nanocomposites [31]. When the content of CNC-ZnO hybrids was greater than 5 wt% no obvious spherulite can be seen. This
could be due to that CNC-ZnO can act as nucleation sites to induce
Fig. 3. (a) The first cooling curve of the non-isothermal DSC (b) the second heating curve for pure PLA and the nanocomposite films with various CNC-ZnO content.
Table 2
the glass transition temperature (Tg), cold crystallization temperature (Tcc), melting temperature (Tm), crystallinity (Xc) and other related data.
chain folding of PLA chains to form smaller PLA spherulites in the nanocomposites.
3.4.Optical performance
The optical performances of PLA nanocomposite are shown in (Fig. 4). It is well known that ZnO with low refractive index, high crystallinity is sensitive to UV light and can absorb the light prop- erties in the visible region of (200–400 nm) [24]. Therefore, CNC- ZnO  can  be  used  as  a  physical  filter  for  ultraviolet  irradiation,
which  can  efficiently avoid  the  light  scattering  and  present high UV shielding properties in the visible region of (200–400 nm). From Fig. 4a the pure PLA showed a transmittance of 94.2% at the wavelength of 800 nm, while the transmittance for all other   PLA nanocomposite films was slightly reduced as CNC-ZnO content increased, but still as high as 83% in the visible region, especially As shown in Fig. 4b, pure PLA film had poor UV-shielding perfor-
mance with quite a low absorbance in the UV-B and UV-A region of  (200–400 nm),  while;  adding  of  CNC-ZnO  hybrids  increases the absorption of UV-B and UV-A region (200–400 nm) and the transmittance decreased  at  the  wavelength  of  320–400 nm (Fig. 4b), which was due to the quantum effect of zinc oxide [32]. Due to the synergistic UV-shielding effects of CNC-ZnO hybrids into the PLA matrix, PLA nanocomposite films show excellentUV-shielding properties compared to that of pure PLA. Thus, the CNC-ZnO hybrids can be used as an efficient and promising UV- shielding material to improve the ultraviolet resistant of PLA. For more investigation, the percentages of UV-A and UV-B radiation blocking and ultraviolet protection factor (UPF) were recorded with UV-2000F Textiles UV Factor Tester (Labsphere Company, USA) according to AATCC 183:2000 standard by using the follow- ing  equations  [33].  The  percentage  blocking  for  UV-A  (320–  400 nm) was calculated by Eq. (3)@3
The percentage blocking for UV-B (280–320 nm) was calculated
by Eq. (4)@4
@5
where   E   (k)   is   the   relative   erythema   spectral   effectiveness,
S   (k)  is  the  spectral  irradiance  (Wm—2 nm—1),  dk  is  bandwidth,
Fig. 4. (a) Variation of transmittance (b) UV–vis diffuse reflectance spectra; (c) of pure PLA and PLA nanocomposite films with various CNC-ZnO contents, and (c) Overview of the UV-shielding and transparency of PLA/CNC-ZnO nanocomposite compared with UV shielding of PLA/ZnO.
T(k) = average spectral transmittance of the fabric (measured), and
k is wavelength.
It is well known that an over-exposure to the sun or ultraviolet radiation can make sunburn and an increased danger of skin cancer [32]. Accordingly, ultraviolet protective materials with UV-blocking might offer unique and greatest prospects to protect against skin
harmfulness effect of the human and environment. Table 1 displays the percentages of UV-A and UV-B radiation blocking and UPF values of pure PLA and PLA nanocomposite films. By adding high content of 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids into the PLA matrix, the highest UV radia- tion was blocked out by (85.31%) of UV-A and (95.90%) of UV-B. The UPF value of pure PLA was considerably low (around 1.07). However,
Fig. 5. (a) Weight loss, and (b) Remaining weight of PLA nanocomposite films with various CNC-ZnO hybrids after being degraded in PBS, (c) Changes in pH value of PLA nanocomposite films as a function of hydrolysis time. (d)Weight loss, and (e) Remaining weigh of PLA nanocomposite films with various CNC-ZnO hybrids after being degraded in soil burial for 110 days.
the UPF values of the PLA nanocomposite films were increased as the content of CNC-ZnO hybrids increased at 3, 5, 10 and 15 wt% were as high as 2.30, 2.52, 7.32 and 22.01, respectively. It is clear that the CNC-ZnO incorporated into PLA matrix blocks the UV radiation according to the AATCC standard, which indicates its possible using as optical UV shielding nanocomposite materials. More importantly, compared to (UV-shielding performance of (83%) at 360 nm and
transmittance of (90%) at 550 nm for PLA/ZnO nanocomposite with 5 wt% ZnO, at the same loading content our of PLA/CNC-ZnO nanocomposites with 5 wt% CNC-ZnO exhibited the lower UV- shielding performance (61%) with similar transmittance of 90.6%) [34] as in (Fig. 4c). Therefore, the using of CNC in this study helps to improve the compatibility between the nanofillers and matrix phases, which could prevent CNC-ZnO aggregation. Suggesting that,
Fig. 6. Photographs of the PLA nanocomposite films shown appearance changes before and after hydrolytic degradation (a), before and after soli degradation(b).
Fig. 6 (continued)
the result of this study had great significance to produce multifunc- tional nanocomposites for potential used as UV-shielding food pack- aging materials.
3.5.Weight loss in hydrolytic and soil degradation
The pure PLA and PLA nanocomposite films were incubated for 70 days under composting conditions at 37 °C in phosphate- buffered saline (PBS), their results of weight loss and remaining
weight are displayed in Fig. 5. The results demonstrate an improved rate of biodegradation for all PLA nanocomposite films compared with pure PLA. As illustrated in Fig. 5a, the more CNC- ZnO hybrids were added the faster degradation rate was obtained. After 70 days of exposure, the weight loss of pure PLA reached only 9%, and around 25% of weight loss was found for PLA nanocompos- ite film by adding 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids. The remaining weight of PLA nanocomposite films is provided in Fig. 5b. It is clear that the    remaining   weight    values    decrease   as    degradation time
increased. For more understanding, the mechanism of such hydro- lytic degradation, the change of pH values of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS at physiological (pH = 7.4)) as a function of hydrolysis time for PLA nanocomposites is displayed in Fig. 5c. Pure PLA exhibited lower pH value when comparing with PLA nanocompos- ites. This behavior could be due to that the nanocomposites were composed of CNCs with more hydroxyl groups which were helpful to absorb water molecules to obtain enhanced hydrophilicity of nanocomposites [25]. It can be pH values were gradually decreased as the content of CNC-ZnO increased, until a minimum value of 4.5 after 70 days because of PLA fragmentation and the following release of lactide oligomers to the incubation medium. It is well known that PLA as biopolyester can be degraded through the random-scission of ester linkages of the polymeric matrix, forming continual fragmentation of the PLA macromolecules into oligo- meric species [35]. And this could be resulted in these newly formed oligomers become water-soluble, when their molar mass reaches about 1.000 g/mol owing to the chains formed by LA units
902	Y.Y. Wang et al. / International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 141 (2019) 893–905
[36]. Such acidic byproducts can increase the degradation rate of PLA by lowering the pH of the PBS buffer solution. These results indicated that the in-vitro degradation of PLA nanocomposite films was significantly higher, compared to that of pure PLA. The improvement in the degradation rate can be attributable to that CNC-ZnO hybrids contains more hydroxyl groups in the  surface of CNC, resulting in improved surface hydrophilicity for PLA nanocomposite films by using controllable loading level of CNC- ZnO hybrids which can adjust its degradation. The possible mech- anism is that, due to the existence of equilibrium reaction in degra- dation, the rate decreases slightly as the reaction reaches equilibrium, but the existence of ZnO in PLA nanocomposites films could be the key factor during the hydrolytic degradation [36]. Thus, the ZnO interacted with hydrogen ion of acidic bioproducts to give Zn2+ and water, which resulted in an increase in the degra- dation rate of PLA (Fig. 5c).
It is well known that the soil degradation of PLA depends on many factors, specifically water absorption, ester cleavage and for- mation of oligomer fragments, solubilization of oligomer frag- ments, and diffusion of soluble oligomers by bacteria [37]. In this study, the soil burial test was made to explore the effect of ambient environment of (Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, China, Hangzhou campus) on the PLA nanocomposite films, without the use of any enzymatic. The weight loss of pure PLA and PLA nanocomposites after soil burial is demonstrated in Fig. 5d. It is clear that, by adding up to 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids, the PLA nanocomposite film was degraded by about 28% after 110 days. It means that the as- prepared nanocomposite films will be completely degraded within one year, which is expected to solve the problem of plastic-based degradation in the future. However, pure PLA showed the smallest degradation rate only about 8% weight loss after 110 days, when it was compared to other PLA nanocomposites. As can be seen in  Fig. 5e, PLA nanocomposites with adding of 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids degraded faster than pure PLA by comparing remaining
weight curves. By adding hydrophilic CNC-ZnO hybrids, the degra- dation rate increased higher than pure PLA. The soil degradation rate increased gradually with the increasing CNC-ZnO contents. It is noted that due to the hydrophobic nature of PLA, it was difficult for water to pass into the nanocomposite films, indeed, outstand- ing hydrophilicity and water solubility of CNC in the PLA nanocom- posites could benefit absorbs and maintain the water [38]. Similar results were reported for the biodegradation of PLA, modified by anatase-titania nanofiller (TiO2) nanofillers under compost condi- tion for 90 days [17]. Therefore, during the soil burial degradation test, the linear chains would break down at the ester bond, and then decrease in molecular weight and mass loss of nanocomposite films through interacted of pure PLA and CNC-ZnO hybrids [39].
3.6.Appearances change the evolution of PLA nanocomposite films after biodegradations
For deep understanding, the appearances changes during the hydrolytic degradation of PLA nanocomposite films were evaluated and illustrated in Fig. 6a. The apparent surfaces of all PLA nanocomposite films were observed after 30, 50, and 70 days of biodegradation to compare with samples before biodegradation (Fig. 6a). It is obvious that all PLA nanocomposite films including pure PLA before biodegradation exhibited a great level of transpar- ent particularly with a high loading of 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids. On the contrary, the transparency of pure PLA after 70 days of biodegradation still remaining almost unchangeable, this suggests that the hydrolytic degradation over 70 days did not vary the crys- tal structure of pure PLA. In the case of other PLA nanocomposite films the transparency was decreased as degradation time increased,  besides  the  films  became  opaque  and   white  after   70 days, signifying the change in the crystallinity of nanocompos- ite films during the hydrolytic degradation.
Fig. 7. (a) FE-SEM micrographs of pure PLA, and (b) PLA nanocomposite with 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids before and after being degraded for 70 days in PBS solution, (c) pure PLA and (d) PLA nanocomposite film with 15 wt% CNC-ZnO after being degraded for 110 days in soil.
Fig. 8. TG/FT-IR superposition plots for pure PLA (a), (b) PLA nanocomposite with 15 wt% CNC-ZnO, (c) The infrared spectrum at the maximum degradation point of PLA and PLA nanocomposite with 15 wt% CNC-ZnO, and (d) (d) Possible mechanism of thermal degradation in PLA nanocomposites with CNC-ZnO hybrids.
The appearances and size changes of PLA nanocomposite films during the soil degradation was investigated  and  presented  in  Fig. 6b. It can be seen that the PLA nanocomposite films gradually degraded and the size was decreased as the degradation time increased. This observation can be attributed to the chemical bond fracture changed from polymer to low molecule, which means that the molecular weight decreased. Besides, when PLA nanocompos- ite films were buried in soil films color changed to opaque and white after 110 days. It can be concluded that soil degradation is different from hydrolysis, and the mechanism should be erosion. More interestingly, our CNC-ZnO hybrids, especially at high load- ing contents, are beneficial to resolve plastic-based disposal prob- lems and to give more understanding to the biodegradation’s mechanism of PLA nanocomposites. This is confirmed by all dis- cussed above data that collected from weight loss, remaining weight, surface and apparent changes in hydrolytic degradation, soil burial degradation, and thermal degradation.
3.7.Morphologies change the evolution of PLA nanocomposite film after biodegradations
For more investigations, the changes on the surface of pure PLA and PLA nanocomposite film with loaded of 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids after the hydrolytic degradation were observed by  FE- SEM (Fig. 7). The surface of PLA nanocomposite films was observed after 70 days of degradation to compare the surface change between pure PLA and PLA nanocomposite film (Fig. 7a, b). It is noticeable that the pure PLA exhibited smooth surface, film texture became brittle, and film can easily break under voltage of electron microscopy because degradation is a depolymerization process [40]. These results are consistent with the literature, who are approved that the autocatalytic degradation of polylactic acid is faster inside than on the surface, so there is no obvious change     on the PLA surface texture [41]. Meanwhile, the surface of PLA nanocomposite with 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids covered by some cavities and white particles, signifying that, the existence of white particles are owing to the starting of the hydrolytic degradation of the PLA matrix.
Additionally, the FE-SEM micrographs of pure PLA and PLA nanocomposite films after 110 days of being degraded in soil burial are shown in Fig. 7. The surfaces became rough with different signs of fragmentation and many gullies clearly observed in the surfaces of pure PLA and PLA nanocomposite film with 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids (Fig. 7c, d). Besides, the surfaces of nanocomposite film were eroded seriously, gullies and cavities spread on the surface   of the film, and the nanocomposite surface becomes more rough with respect of pure PLA (Fig. 7d). According to the variations of surface morphology, it suggests that adding CNC-ZnO can improve the degradation rate of PLA matrix in soil.
3.8.Thermal degradation analysis
Generally, during the decomposition of biopolyester many byproducts can be formed [42]. Therefore, to make a qualitative analysis of these byproducts that are formed during the thermal decomposition of PLA nanocomposites, the thermal degradation process was monitored by TG instrument connected with FT-IR spectrometer was used in this study. Fig. 8 provides the spectra byproducts of pure PLA and PLA nanocomposites with 15 wt% CNC-ZnO hybrids were almost identical. This was likely because in all nanocomposite’s films PLA is the main polymer. Nevertheless, the peak strength is different, indicating that the products formed in the thermal decomposition process of PLA are basically similar, but the content is different. It can be concluded that the addition of CNC-ZnO hybrids into the PLA matrix have an effect on the final
morphology of the most decomposed products, and may have an impact on the decomposition pathway.
As shown in Fig. 8a, the PLA showed higher decomposition tem- perature at 370 °C, compared with nanocomposite film 15 wt% CNC-ZnO exhibited  maximum  decomposition  temperature  at 284 °C. It is demonstrated that PLA nanocomposite films are ther- mally smallest stable than PLA matrix, which could be due to the
existence of ZnO onto the CNC that had a catalytic effect on the nanocomposite chain of PLA leading to the promotion of thermo degradation process. The reduction in thermal stability of PLA nanocomposites films with various CNC-ZnO content could be due to the effect of the metallic nanoparticles such as Fe, Al, Zn or Sn catalyze depolymerization reactions of the polymer matrix, promoting up thermo degradation process [18]; supported by ther- mal stability results (see Fig. S5, Table S2). The most characteristics peaks recorded at band positions between 3400 and 4000 cm—1, indicating that the water was decomposed, at 2250–2300 cm—1 and 2300–2400 cm—1 due to the formed of CO and CO2, respec- tively. At 2600–2800 cm—1 due to the formation of aldehyde, and the band position between 600 and 1400 cm—1 was attributed to hydrocarbons and aliphatic Fig. 8c. The strong absorption peak of all the samples was about 1700 cm—1, which indicated that most of the produced byproducts had an aliphatic group [15,43]. It is well known that the PLA has two main pyrolysis mechanisms are cis-elimination and trans-esterification, which generate lactide isomers and a low ring of polymers, and acrylic acid and acyclic oli-
gomers through cis-racemization. In addition, some of the free rad- ical reaction can also occur in more than 300 °C, and lead to the formation of aldehydes and carbon monoxide [44]. Moreover, the
addition of CNC-ZnO hybrids shorten the period of thermal degra- dation of polylactic acid (PLA), a product is relatively concentrated, mainly aliphatic (1700 cm—1), maybe because the CNC-ZnO regu- late PLA/back-bone ester groups, by speeding the unzipping depolymerization reactions as shown in (Fig. 8d possible mecha- nism of thermal degradation in PLA nanocomposites with CNC- ZnO hybrids). Besides, the adding of CNC-ZnO into PLA interacted
with  a  large  number  of  hydrogen  bonds,  after  280 °C  when the
hydrogen bond is destroyed, the sample decomposition, the pro-
duct is relatively single [45]. The result of this study may stimulus to choose the appropriate PLA nanocomposite films for packaging applications.
4.Conclusions
In this study, we prepared PLA nanocomposite films combined with CNC-ZnO hybrids to modulate their long-term biodegradation behaviors. As the CNC-ZnO hybrids loading increased, the resulting degree of crystallinity increased due to improve crystallization ability and interactions between the nanofillers and matrix. The UPF values of the PLA nanocomposite films were increased up to
22.01as the content of CNC-ZnO hybrids increased at 15 wt%. Fur- thermore, the nanocomposites had a positive effect on biodegrada- tion ability, thus there are 8–25% of weight loss after 70 days during hydrolytic degradation and 9–28%  of  weight  loss  after  110 days during soil burial degradation. It was concluded that application of CNC-ZnO hybrids as nanofillers for PLA matrix is may be interesting not only in terms of improving UV-shielding performances but also controlled degradation ability.
Acknowledgments
The work is funded by the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST (2018QNRC001), Integrated Project of Green Manufacturing and Recycling System for Waste Textiles, Ministry of Industry and information Technology of China, and Candidates
of Young and Middle Aged Academic Leader of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LZ20E030011), Zhejiang Provincial welfare technology Science Foundation of China (LZ19E030002) and ‘‘521” Talent Project of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University.
