<title>Satellite-Based Tracking of Oil Pollution in the Arabian Gulf and the Sea of Oman</title>
<author>J. Zhao,∗  M. Temimi, M. Al Azhar, and H. Ghedira</author>
<Affiliation>Institute Center for Water and Environment, Masdar Institute of Science and Technology, PO Box 54224, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radiological Protection</Journal>
<Publishing_house>IOP Publishing</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/07038992.2015.1042543</DOI>
<URL> http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07038992.2015.1042543</URL>
Abstract. Two oil spill events were investigated using multisensor satellite images in the Al Khafji and Al Fujairah regions. Oil slicks were characterized with Red-Green-Blue (RGB) and floating algae index (FAI) images. Oil slicks near Al Khafji were detected on April 19, 2014 by Landsat 8 and covered around 29.04 km2. Sequential VIIRS and MODIS/Aqua images collected on the same day observed the same slicks, which indicated different appearances in the RGB images. Another event was recorded near Al Fujairah on May 11, 2014 by both Landsat 8 and Aqua. The total area coverage of oil slicks was 114.6 km2. The estimated slick trajectories from GNOME driven by ocean circulation data from the Regional Ocean Model System (ROMS) and meteorological data were assessed with the movement patterns of satellite-detected oil slicks. The average absolute percentage error of velocity of slick movement between satellite observation and GNOME simulation was 33% for both events. The directions of slick movement showed an agreement between satellite observation and model simulation in 5 out of 7 trajectories’ cases. This implies that the integration of multisensor satellite measurements and spill trajectory modeling is very helpful to forecast and predict the fate and transport of oil spills.
Re´sume´. Deux de´versements d’hydrocarbures ont e´te´ e´tudie´s en utilisant des images satellitaires multicapteurs dans les re´gions d’Al Khafji et d’Al Fujairah. Les nappes de pe´trole ont e´te´ caracte´rise´es avec des images rouge-vert-bleu (RVB) « red-green-blue (RGB) » et avec l’indice d’algues flottantes « floating algae index » (FAI). Les nappes de pe´trole pre`s d’Al Khafji ont e´te´ de´tecte´es le 19 avril 2014 par Landsat 8 et elles couvraient environ 29,04 km2. Les images se´quentielles VIIRS et MODIS/Aqua acquises le meˆme jour ont observe´  les meˆmes nappes, indique´es par diffe´rents aspects dans les images RVB. Un autre e´ve`nement a e´te´ de´tecte´ pre`s d’Al Fujairah le 11 mai 2014 a` la fois par Landsat 8 et Aqua. La superficie totale de ces nappes e´tait de 114,6 km2. Les trajectoires des de´versements d’hydrocarbure estime´es a` partir de GNOME, en utilisant les donne´es de la circulation oce´anique du Regional Ocean Model System (ROMS) et les donne´es me´te´orologiques, ont e´te´  e´value´es en utilisant les de´placements des nappes de pe´trole de´tecte´es par satellite. Le pourcentage d’erreur absolue moyenne de la vitesse de mouvement de la nappe entre l’observation par satellite et la simulation de GNOME e´tait de 33% pour les 2 e´ve`nements. Les directions de mouvements des nappes ont montre´ un accord entre l’observation par satellite et la simulation du mode`le dans 5 des 7 cas de trajectoires. Ceci implique que l’inte´gration de mesures satellitaires multicapteurs et la mode´lisation des trajectoires des de´versements sont tre`s utiles pour pre´voir et pre´dire le devenir et le transport des de´versements de pe´trole.
INTRODUCTION
The adverse effects of oil pollution caused by oil explo- ration, production, transportation, natural seepage, and ballast water discharge are numerous. Oil pollution can kill marine mammals, sea grass, coral reefs, and fish, which leads to the imbalance of the food web (Barron 2012; Mendelssohn et al. 2012; Whitehead et al. 2012). Oil spills can also destroy ma- rine wildlife habitat and breeding grounds (Davis et al. 2014). Furthermore, if trapped in bottom sediments, the effects of oil spills on local benthos can last for several years. Major oil spill events can even lead to major economic losses when they hit
Received 30 September 2014. Accepted 11 March 2015.
∗Corresponding author e-mail: jzhao@masdar.ac.ae
desalination plants, fish farms, or recreational areas. The local tourism industry could suffer from significant setbacks because access to affected recreational areas is not allowed for tourists. For example, the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 caused an estimated total loss in the order of tens of billions of US dollars (Bozeman 2011). To conserve the wildlife, fisheries, and natural resources in the marine en- vironment, accurate detection and prediction of oil spills are significantly demanded.
Remote sensing can provide a synoptic view of the ocean surface with large spatial and temporal scales. This technology has been assessed and verified as an important tool for detecting and monitoring oil spills. Many efforts have been undertaken to obtain valuable information from remote sensing data, such as position, size, and duration of oil slicks (Brekke and Solberg 2005; Garcia-Pineda et al. 2009). Conventional remote sensing
technologies to monitor oil spills in the aquatic environment include optical (such as passive visible and infrared, laser flu- orosensor), and passive or active microwave (such as Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)) sensors onboard aircrafts or satellites (Muller-Karger et al. 2005). These techniques have been suc- cessfully employed for oil detection (Cheng et al. 2011; Shir- vany et al. 2012; Fingas and Brown 2014). However, they could lead to false alarms caused by low wind and natural biogenic films. Additionally, the detectability of oil slicks using SAR data is possible within a certain range of wind speed, ideally between 3 and 6 m s−1 (Essa et al. 2005; Fingas and Brown 2014). SAR fails to distinguish thick oil slicks with thickness > 100 µm from thin oil sheens with thickness to 0.1 µm (Leifer et al. 2012). Furthermore, most of the traditional techniques have been deemed expensive.
In contrast, passive optical sensors can be cost effective  for oil detection. The Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrora- diometer (MODIS) onboard the Terra (2000–present) and Aqua (2002–present) satellites is equipped with two 250-m and five 500-m medium resolution channels, whose capability for oil detection has already been proven (Leifer et al. 2012; Bulgarelli and Djavidnia 2012). Hu et al. (2003) used MODIS 250-m resolution data to detect oil spills in a turbid lake in Venezuela, which showed apparent contrast against the bright background. Hu et al. (2009) found that oil spills in oligotrophic open ocean waters can be detectable in MODIS imagery under sun-glint conditions. De Carolis et al.  (2012)  explored  the  potential of the Medium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer (MERIS, 2003–2012) data to detect oil spill and its thickness. The applicability of high-resolution imagery from Landsat missions for oil detection has also been tested in different areas. Landsat 5 TM (1983–2013) was used in an oil spill emergency in the Guanabara Bay, Brazil (Bentz and de Miranda 2001). Landsat 7 ETM (1999–present) imagery was successfully used to detect oil spills in the Arabian Gulf by Essa et al. (2005). Landsat 8 (2013–present) images were explored by Zhao et al. (2014) for oil detection in the Arabian Gulf, and their findings demonstrated the usefulness of this newly launched satellite for oil detection. Although the revisit frequency of Landsat missions is 16 days, the spatial resolution is 30 m and, thus, small-scale oil slicks can be captured. Other optical sensors, such as Sea-viewing Wide Field-of-view Sensor (SeaWiFS, 1997–2010; Bentz and Barros 2005) and Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR, 1978–present; Tseng and Chiu 1994) have also shown great potential for oil detection and monitoring. Approaches involving multisensor data have been strongly suggested for effective monitoring of oil spills (Zhao et al. 2014). Nonetheless, it is worth noting that discharged  oil into the sea is subject to weathering that corresponds to     a progressive series of nonadvective changes, which alter the physical and chemical characteristics of oil slicks (Reed et al. 1999; Leifer et al. 2012). Oil weathering breaks down oil slicks, and may make them heavier than water and thereby undetectable by remote sensing if they sink. Therefore, of great importance is remote detection of oil pollution before it becomes undetectable.
When combating oil spills, it is of great importance to be aware of the expected fate and behavior of oil slicks, which,  in turn, can guide field observations and mitigation efforts, and provide valuable information to decision makers for contin- gency plans. Multisatellite observations hold great potential for oil pollution tracking and monitoring. The trajectory inferred from satellite measurements can implement the information de- rived from hydrodynamic models, which have been widely used for oil tracking (Wang and Shen 2010; Beegle-Krause 2001; Liu et al. 2011). There are different operational hydrodynamic mod- els for oil tracking, such as the Oil Drift 3-Dimensional model (OD3D; Wettre et al. 2011), the Me´te´o France oil Spill Model (MOTHY; Daniel et al. 2004), the Japan Meteorological Agency oil spill prediction (JMA; 2007), the General NOAA Operational Modeling Environment (GNOME; Beegle-Krause 2001; Marta- Almeida et al.2013), and the Greek Operational Oceanography System (POSEIDON; Perivoliotis et al. 2011). All existing tra- jectory models have their virtues and defects. However, the GNOME model developed by the Emergency Response Divi- sion of NOAA’s Office of Response and Restoration seems to be the most straightforward to implement and maintain. Its feasi- bility to simulate oil trajectories has been assessed and verified in different marine environments (Cheng et al. 2011; Marta- Almeida et al. 2013; Xu et al. 2013). Although the GNOME model has been applied to the region around Rajaee Port of Bandar Abbas, Iran, by Farzingohar et al. (2011), the outputs have not been validated with “concurrent” in situ measurements or satellite observations. Zhao et al. (2014) used a global hydro- dynamic model, HYCOM, and wind data to qualitatively infer the trajectory of oil slicks in the Arabian Gulf. Their preliminary effort is further developed in this study by determining oil spill trajectory from a blended approach that relies on multiple satel- lite acquisitions and a transport model (i.e., GNOME, which  is driven by regional hydrodynamic model outputs of higher temporal resolution and meteorological data).
The Arabian Gulf is well known for its active oil production and reserves. The gulf region suffers from oil pollution associ- ated with different sources, such as ships, tankers, oil platforms, and natural seepage. Furthermore, the countries around the gulf are reliant on desalination plants for drinking water supply. Oil spills also affect the operation of desalination plants if any inci- dent occurs. Therefore, of great concern is to efficiently detect and predict oil spills.
In this article, 2 oil spill events in the Arabian Gulf and the Sea of Oman are studied with multisensor data, including MODIS onboard the Aqua satellite, Operational Land Imager (OLI) on- board the Landsat 8 satellite, and Visible Infrared Imaging Ra- diometer Suite (VIIRS) onboard the Suomi-NPP satellite. The trajectories of oil slicks are determined from different satellite acquisitions and simulated with the GNOME model. The goal of the study is twofold: (1) to detect and track oil spills in the Arabian Gulf and the Sea of Oman using medium resolution multisensor data; (2) to assess the potential of multiple satellite acquisition in the evaluation of oil transport models, such as GNOME, and establish a blended oil pollution tracking system
FIG. 1. Map of the study area. The isobaths of 10, 20, 50, 100, 200 m are annotated, as labeled by the red numbers. The red, green, and blue boxes show the Landsat 8 scene boundaries for paths and rows as follows: (159, 42), (159, 43), and (165, 40). The black dots show the major oil fields in the Arabian Gulf. The 2 magenta boxes show the 2 areas illustrated in this study, Al Khafji and Al Fujairah, respectively.
that assimilates remote sensing snapshots into transport mod- els. Automatic detection of oil spills from satellite imagery is beyond the scope of this study.
DATA AND METHOD
Study Area
The Arabian Gulf (Figure 1) is a semienclosed marginal sea. It is located in the arid region of the Middle East and connected to the Sea of Oman through the Strait of Hormuz. Its average depth is 35 m. The gulf region is surrounded by Kuwait, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Iran, and Oman. In 1978, the Regional Organization for the Protection of the Marine Environment (ROPME) was established by these 8 countries. Records from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) show that the region holds the highest reserves of crude oil in the world (OPEC 2014). The gulf region has one of the busiest shipping-traffic passages with an annual estimate of over 50,000 different types of ships, espe- cially tankers, crossing the strategic shipping route.1 The high FIG. 2. Volumes of oil released into the Arabian Gulf and number of reported oil spill events from 1965 to 2012. Data courtesy of Marine Emergency Mutual Aid Center (MEMAC).
marine traffic and oil production, together with other sources (dredging, natural seepage, and ballast water discharge), have caused frequent oil pollution in the ROPME sea region. Figure 2 shows records that illustrate the oil spill events in the ROPME area from 1965 to 2012 from the Marine Emergency Mutual Aid Center (MEMAC). Major oil spill events were reported during the Gulf Wars in the 1980s and 1990s. In 2009, 52 oil spill events were documented. During the past 48 years, a total of
5.65    108 gallons of oil have been released into the ROPME sea
area.
Satellite Data Processing
MODIS level 0 (L0) data were acquired from NASA ocean color data archive. These L0 data were converted to radiance data using the most recent calibrations in SeaDAS (V7.0). Then the procedure to correct gaseous absorption and Rayleigh scat- tering was undertaken using the NOAA Community Satellite Processing Package (CSPP). Please refer to Walther et al. (2013) for details. Rayleigh-corrected reflectance (Rrc) was produced. These Rrc data were resampled to 250 m and mapped with a cylindrical projection method. Red-Green-Blue (RGB) images were generated using the georeferenced Rrc at 645 (R), 555 (G), and 469 (B) nm. Floating algae index (FAI) imagery was pro- duced with Rrc at 645, 859, and 1240 nm (Hu 2009). VIIRS L1B data were obtained from the NOAA Comprehensive Large Array-data Stewardship System (CLASS) and processed in a similar way to the MODIS data. RGB images were produced with the georeferenced Rrc at 671 (R), 551 (G), and 486 (B) nm by using the CSPP software.
Landsat 8 L1 georeferenced total radiance data were obtained from the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and processed simi- larly to the MODIS data. Rrc data were derived for bands 1–6 (Zhao et al. 2014). RGB images were composited with Rrc at 655 (R), 562 (G), and 443 (B) nm. FAI maps were generated
with Rrc at 655, 865, and 1610 nm. These FAI maps have been found to be helpful to differentiate oil slicks from algal blooms (Zhao et al. 2014). To enhance the contrast between oil- contam- inated and oil-free areas, all RGB images were stretched with the 2% linear contrast stretch method in Envi (V5.1).
Oil Slick Detection and Tracking
We follow the approach developed by Zhao et al. (2014) to identify oil slicks, which is briefly described here. RGB im- ages that correspond to the dates of reported oil pollution and exhibit apparent contrasts (bright or dark) against surrounding oil-free waters are carefully inspected. The Rrc spectra through transects that involve the impacted areas were analyzed. Because the appearance of oil slicks in an RGB image depends on the so- lar/viewing geometry, and oil type and thickness, the Rrc spectra of oil slicks might indicate higher or lower trends over all wave- bands and demonstrate significant fluctuations when compared with those without oil contamination. In order to exclude the “look-alikes” as the potential sources of the detected features, the corresponding FAI image, if available, is examined. Thin oil slicks indicate low FAI whereas an algae mat shows high FAI (Zhao et al., 2014). Furthermore, algal blooms dominated by different phytoplankton species have their own specific features as reported by Zhao et al. (2015). They used true color, modi- fied fluorescence line height (MFLH), enhanced red-green-blue (ERGB), and the ratio of particulate backscattering to MFLH images to characterize and differentiate different algal blooms.
In this work, 2 oil spills were studied, one near Al Khafji  in the Arabian Gulf, detected on April 19, 2014, and the other near Al Fujairah in the Sea of Oman, detected on May 11, 2014. In the absence of in situ records to validate the occurrence of the spills, published literature and reports issued by ROPME or local municipalities were used to validate the oil detections (Marine Emergency Mutual Aid Center 2013). The location of oil platforms and passage of ships were also used to corroborate the identification of oil slicks.
In order to delineate oil slicks accurately, a threshold-based approach was adopted using Rrc values which may show lower or higher Rrc than neighboring nonoiled waters. In this study, thresholds of Rrc at band 6 of Landsat 8, in other words, 1610 nm (Rrc(1610)), were quantified with a morphological method as described in Zhao et al. (2013).
Using Landsat 8 RGB images detected on April 19 and May 11, 2014, a gradient image was then generated for each Rrc(1610), and the gradient was defined as the difference be- tween each pixel and the adjacent pixels in a 3   3 window   for each detection. The mode of the maximum gradient was generated, which was used to differentiate fronts induced by oil slicks. Then, a mean value for all pixels in the Rrc(1610) image related to the gradient mode was calculated as well as the stan- dard deviation. The threshold was defined as the average plus 2 standard deviations. Because the thickness and type of each oil slick may differ, image-specific Rrc(1610) thresholds were used.
Finally, to infer the trajectory of oil pollution from consecu- tive satellite observations, the center of gravity of the delineated oil slicks in each image was determined by systematically an- alyzing the morphology of the oil slick extents. The change in the positions of the center of the gravity of the oil slick was then monitored to determine the trajectories by connecting the determined centers of gravities.
Oil Spill Trajectory  Modeling
To assess the one that is inferred from multiple satellite ac- quisitions, we simulated the trajectory of oil slicks by assimilat- ing the initially delineated oil slicks from satellite measurements into a transport model. To this end, 2 models were used, namely, the Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS) to determine, among other items, sea current velocity and direction, and the GNOME model. The ROMS outputs of hourly u and v velocities were used to force the GNOME model. In addition to the ocean currents, the GNOME model was also forced by u and v wind components, which were obtained from the similar ECMWF ERA-Interim reanalysis data used in forcing the ROMS.
GNOME is a computerized trajectory model that attempts to predict the movement of actual or hypothetical pollution spills. In this model, spills are modeled as clouds of particles which are moved by advective and dispersive processes. Advections of spills are caused by currents and wind stress and simulated as a Lagrangian element. GNOME simulates the turbulent diffusion that spreads spills horizontally with a straightforward random walk.
GNOME is enabled to simulate the trajectories of different pollutants, such as nonweathering oil and crude oil. It can be implemented for any region in the world by feeding a realistic land-ocean mask, ocean circulation, and surface wind. Splots that represent the best estimated paths and extension of spills  (Best Guess Solution) are output from GNOME. The number of splots is set before each model run. Uncertainties induced by input parameters result in the Minimum Regret trajectory compilation.
In this study, the number of splots was arbitrarily set to 1,000. The results presented below are the average of the 1,000 splots. A default diffusion coefficient of 100,000 was adopted. The Minimum Regret module was inactivated. The surface current was obtained from the ROMS. The modeling aspect is described in the following section. The wind data were obtained from reanalysis data of global wind.
ROMS is a 3-dimensional, free surface, terrain-following coordinate, hydrostatic, and primitive equations model (Haid- vogel et al. 2008; Azhar et al. 2014). We set the horizontal grid of the model to cover the Arabian Gulf and the Sea of Oman
bounded by 47.54◦–62.32◦ E and 21.55◦–30.76◦ N with a reso-
lution of 5 km. The model has 25 vertical layers with stretching parameters that set finer resolution in the surface and bottom lay- ers. Bathymetry of the model was obtained from the ETOPO1 Global Relief Model (Amante and Eakins 2009).
Initial and boundary values of u and v velocities, temper- ature, salinity, and sea surface height were obtained from the daily analysis of the HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model2 (HY- COM; Bleck 2002) from April 1 to May 31, 2014. Open lateral boundary conditions were imposed at the southern and eastern boundaries. Radiation conditions by Flather (1976) and Chap- man (1985) were used for depth-averaged velocity and sea sur- face height, respectively. An adaptive nudging technique was applied for the boundary conditions of temperature, salinity, and velocities (Marchesiello et al. 2003).
The ROMS was forced by 3-hourly reanalysis data of ECMWF ERA-Interim with a spatial resolution of 1/8◦ (Dee et al. 2011). Tides are known to be small in the model domain and, thus, are not included as the forcing in this study (Yao and Johns 2010). The model was run for 2 months of simulation time from April through May 2014 when the first 2 weeks of the simulation were dedicated for spin-up. The ROMS outputs of hourly u and v velocities were used to force the GNOME model.
The spatial domain of ROMS covered the entire gulf re- gion and the Sea of Oman, which included both study sites. GNOME that was forced by ROMS and wind data was run locally where the oil pollution was initially detected. In the coupling of ROMS/GNOME, forcing from ROMS is updated regularly to account for changes in sea and weather conditions. Although the validation and assessment of ROMS is beyond the scope of this study, a consistency between the trajectories of oil spills derived from satellite observation and model simulation using ROMS/GNOME models should indicate the reliability of the modeling system.
FIG. 3. (a) Landsat 8 derived true color image for April 19, 2014 around the Al Khafji region. The spatial resolution is 30 m. The oil-contaminated areas are outlined with red lines and labeled with numbers. The white box shows the area, which is enlarged in the inset image. (b) The floating algae index (FAI) map for the enlarged area. (c) The thresholds of Rrc at 1610 nm to delineate the oil slicks and the corresponding oil covered areas.
RESULTS
Case Study near Al Khafji in the Northern Arabian Gulf
Figure 3(a) shows the Landsat 8 RGB image collected on April 19, 2014 near Al Khafji in the northern Arabian Gulf. Two areas with bright contrasts compared with neighboring oil-free waters are clearly discernible. The center latitudes and longitudes are listed in Table 1. The corresponding FAI image is shown in Figure 3(b). FAI values within area 1 were vari- able. The high FAI values might indicate high biogenic activi- ties during the observation period whereas the low FAI values were caused by oil slicks. Examination of MODIS ocean color
products before oil spill occurrences demonstrated the possible presence of Trichodesmium mats floating on the ocean surface in the nearby region as their species-specific spectral signa- ture of “high-low-high-low-high” in the MODIS bands between 469 and 555 nm (Zhao and Ghedira 2014) was observed. Area 2 showed lower FAI values against surrounding oil-free areas. The delineated oil slicks in areas 1 and 2, according to the threshold- based approach, showed a total spatial extent of 29.04 km2 with
15.57 and 13.47 km2 for areas 1 and 2, respectively. The thresh- olds of Rrc(1610) for areas 1 and 2 (Figure 3(c)) were 0.06 and 0.058, respectively. The 2 oil slicked areas were also detected by VIIRS (Figure 4(a)) and MODIS/Aqua (Figure 4(b)) images
TABLE 1
Ancillary information for the oil slicks detected near Al Khafji in the Arabian Gulf on April 19, 2014
FIG. 4. True color images from (a) VIIRS and (b) MODIS/Aqua, collected on April 19, 2014 around the Al Khafji region. Satellite overpass times are annotated. The spatial resolution is 250 m.
TABLE 2
Comparisons between satellite and GNOME derived velocity and direction of oil slick movement on April 19, 2014collected on the same day, which passed over the area2h 27m and 2 h 39 m later, respectively, than Landsat 8 did. The loca- tions of the detected slicks in VIIRS and MODIS were different from where they were identified in the Landsat 8 image.
As indicated in Table 2, the center positions of both oil- covered areas moved southwest. This agrees well with the sim- ulation results from the GNOME model, as shown in Figure 5. However, the velocity from the satellite measurements and the GNOME simulations shows discrepancy. The average absolute percentage error of velocity of oil slicks between satellite obser- vation and model estimate was 17% for both detected areas. The simulated trajectories of the oil slicks during the first 48 hours after they were detected by Landsat 8 at 7:16 GMT are plotted in Figure 5. The trajectories were generally parallel to the coast line and it was very unlikely that one of the 2 oil slicks could have made landfall within 48 hours, given the estimated velocity and direction. Inspections of satellite images within 2 days after April 10, 2014, the 2 oil-covered areas were undetectable. This means that the oil slicks dissipated before they could reach the coast. Examination of the model simulation indicated that oil
FIG. 5. Trajectories of oil slicks simulated with the GNOME model for areas (a) 1 and (b) 2, annotated in Figure 3. The duration for each trajectory is 48 hours since the time when oil slicks were detected in the Landsat 8 image, i.e., 7:16:35 GMT, April 19, 2014. The “ ” signs denote the center positions of oil slicks detected in the multiple satellite images shown in Figures 3(a) and 4.
trajectories are more sensitive to sea surface current than wind. This is consistent with findings from previous studies (Elha- keem et al. 2007). The extent of the slicks and the weathering process should be, on the other hand, significantly dependent on meteorological conditions.
Case Study near Al Fujairah in the Western Sea of Oman
Another case of oil spill near Al Fujairah in the western Sea of Oman is illustrated in Figure 6; 12 patches of oil slicks were found in the Landsat 8 RGB image collected on May 11, 2014 (Figure 6(a)). The center latitudes and longitudes are sum- marized in Table 3. The corresponding FAI image, shown in Figure 6(b), exhibited lower FAI values in the oil-covered areas than in the oil-free areas. The width of the slicks ranged from
0.19 km to 5 km. The length of the slicks ranged from 1.4 km to 22.6 km. The threshold of Rrc(1610) is plotted against the area number in Figure 6(c). Its magnitude varied from 0.034 for area 1 to 0.041 for area 11. The corresponding oil-covered area among the 12 detected patches varied in the range of 0.13 km2–49.23 km2. The largest area coverage was found in area 3. Areas 1–5, which covered a total area of 114.6 km2, were re- peatedly detected by MODIS/Aqua, which flew over the area 2 hours and 36 minutes after Landsat 8 passed over on May 11, 2014. However, areas 1–5 exhibited bright contrasts rel- ative to nonoiled areas, probably caused by discrepancies in solar/viewing geometry between the 2 sensors. The other areas, 6–12, were not detectable any longer with MODIS, which may be explained by (i) the limited spatial extent, especially of areas 9–10 with respect to the spatial resolution of MODIS or (ii) the weathering process, which may have dissipated the oil slicks  2 hours and 36 minutes after their first detection.
Comparison between the Landsat 8 and Aqua images in- dicated that areas 1 and 2 moved southwest, areas 3 and 4 moved northwest, and area 5 moved southeast (Table 4). In terms of direction, outputs from the GNOME simulations (Fig- ure 7) showed an agreement with satellite observations for areas 1, 2, and 5. For areas 3 and 4, estimated trajectories showed southeastward movements (Table 4). With respect to the veloc- ity,  the lowest absolute percentage error was 10.71% for  area
1. Overall, the agreement in terms of velocity with an overall average absolute percentage error (areas 1–4) of 31% was ac- ceptable. In the case of area 5, which had the largest extent, the
FIG. 6. (a) Landsat 8 RGB image collected on May 11, 2014 in the Sea of Oman. The overpass time was 6:39:35 GMT. The areas outlined with red lines show the oil slicks and are labeled with numbers. (b) The corresponding FAI image. (c) The thresholds of Rrc at 1610 nm to delineate the oil slicks and the corresponding oil-covered areas. (d) Aqua RGB image collected on the same day (9:15 GMT). The oil slicks are outlined with red lines. Satellite overpass times are annotated.
satellite derived velocity (0.06 m s−1) was significantly smaller than the GNOME derived velocity (0.19 m s−1). This is perhaps due to the exclusion of the weathering processes in the model, which may have impacted the transport of the slicks. The lower inertia of the smaller slick areas 1–4 made the weathering pro- cesses less significant and, therefore, led to a higher agreement between satellite observation and model simulation. All of the 5 oil slicks were not detected in the subsequent satellite acquisi- tions collected on May 12, 2014. They were probably entrained into strong currents in the Sea of Oman and dissipated gradually. If we consider that the distances used to approximate the veloc- ity were those between the centers of gravity of 2 consecutive
acquisitions of a single slick, one can assume that the range of velocity error is acceptable.
DISCUSSION
As stated previously, there was some inconsistency between satellite observations and hydrodynamic simulations in terms of oil-slick movement direction for 2 oil-covered areas in the Sea of Oman. These 2 areas were less than 5 km away from land. The spatial resolution for the ocean current is 5 km. This means that there was only 1 current vector for the 2 oil-covered areas. For coastal waters with complex mixing of ocean circulations, fine-scale ocean circulation data are needed for different studies
TABLE 3
Ancillary information for the oil slicks detected near Al Fujairah in the Sea of Oman on May 11, 2014to improve their accuracy. Because the scale of ocean circu- lations in the Sea of Oman can be localized at an extent that   is smaller than the horizontal resolution of the hydrodynamic model, small eddies may dissipate the detected oil-contaminated areas that might not be captured by the model. For example, if oil is released at the intersections of 2 currents, oil trajectories simulated with coarse resolution ocean circulation data could be misleading whereas fine-scale ocean circulation data can im- prove the performance of hydrodynamic models to track oil slicks and provide precise guidance to combat oil spills. Simi- larly, the resolution of wind data that force the GNOME model needs to be improved. Furthermore, the satellite observations were from different sensors. In consideration of the relatively short intervals between satellite measurements, the effects of geolocation errors in satellite data should also be accounted for. In this study, the resolution of the hydrodynamic model was dictated by the available computational infrastructure that did not allow simulations at a higher horizontal resolution.
However, the velocity of oil slicks  obtained  from  satel- lite observations and GNOME simulations shows discrepan- cies to different extents. When the time interval between 2
observations is small, for example areas 1 and 2 detected by VI- IRS and Aqua on April 19, 2014, the difference of the velocity of oil slick movement between satellite observation and GNOME simulation is small. When the time interval is large, significant discrepancies of oil slick movement velocity are found between satellite measurements and GNOME modeling. This could be attributed to oil weathering since the nonweathering configura- tion was used in the GNOME model. Oil slicks in the ocean are subject to weathering processes caused by actions of wind, current, and physical-chemical transformations (Ivanov 2010). The satellite overpass time was within 3 hours of local noon. For example, the VIIRS overpass time on April 19, 2014 was 9:42:06 GMT. The temperature could be very high during the period when oil slicks were found, which is favorable for oil weathering. Therefore, oil weathering should be taken into ac- count to improve the performance of the GNOME model for oil tracking.
The impact of weathering processes on the model’s perfor- mance with respect to the satellite measurement seems variable depending on the size of the slick. For slicks with small size, there is no significant discrepancy between satellite observation
TABLE 4
Comparisons between satellite and GNOME derived velocity and direction of oil slick movement on May 11, 2014
FIG. 7. Trajectories of oil slicks simulated with the GNOME model for areas 1–5 annotated in Figure 6(a). The duration for each trajectory is 48 hours since the time the oil slicks were detected in the Landsat 8 image, i.e., 6:39:35 GMT, May 11, 2014. The center positions of oil slicks detected in multiple satellite images in Figure 6 (a) and (d) are annotated with “ ” of different colors.
and model simulation without accounting for the weathering factor. As in the case of minor oil slicks, it is the ocean current that mostly controls the movement of the slicks. However, oil slicks with large size have higher inertia and slower movement. They are more impacted by the weathering factor. Therefore, it is essential to account for the oil weathering in the case of large oil slicks.
Sequential satellite observations can be used to evaluate the estimated movement of oil slicks from GNOME. Furthermore, satellite observations are needed for model initialization, up- date, and uncertainty assessment. This goal can be achieved through the use of images from a constellation of polar-orbiting satellites such as those exploited in this study, which will be supported with the launch of the Sentinel-3 mission in mid- 2015. Furthermore, the advent of geostationary satellites with moderate spatial resolution such as Geostationary Ocean Color Image 2 (GOCI-2), Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites-R Series (GOES-R), and Geostationary Coastal and Air Pollution Events (GEO-CAPE) will expand the potential of oil spill detection and tracking.
It is well known that optical satellite observations require clear-sky conditions. When improper sky conditions, such as cloud, rain, dust storm, are encountered, no information can be extracted from satellite observations. Furthermore, SAR data can be used together with optical satellite data for oil detection because of its applicability under day, night, and all weather
conditions. For example, Xu at al. (2013) used SAR, Chinese HJ-1-B CCD, and MODIS data to depict oil spills in the Bohai Sea, China. In contrast, transport models are not affected by cloud coverage and once initialized and forced properly they can develop reliable predictions of slicks’ trajectories. There- fore, hydrodynamic modeling can bridge the gaps when satellite observations are not available because of cloud coverage. Once satellite measurements are available, new positions and extents of oil slicks can be ultimately assimilated into the transport model to correct the forecasts. The agreement between satel- lite observations and simulated trajectories shown in this study demonstrated the potential of such blended data assimilation- based approach. In addition, hydrodynamic models can be uti- lized to simulate the 3-dimensional structure of oil spills beneath the surface, especially when the origin of the spill is submerged pipelines connecting oil fields or the well itself, as was the case in the Deepwater Horizon incident. In order to effectively com- bat oil pollution in the marine environment, a forecasting and warning system to integrate multiple satellite observations and hydrodynamic modeling is strongly recommended.
CONCLUSION
This article reported the studies on using multisensor satellite imagery to detect and track 2 oil spill events in the Arabian Gulf and the Sea of Oman. Due to the variations in solar/viewing geometry and oil type and thickness, oil slicks indicate bright and/or dark contrasts in satellite-derived RGB images. FAI im- ages showed low values for oil slicks, which can be used to differentiate oil slicks from algal blooms. The movement pat- terns of oil spills observed by satellite measurements generally agreed well with the simulation results from the GNOME model for oil tracking. But there were exceptions when oil slicks were found very close to the land in the Sea of Oman, which was probably caused by complicated ocean circulations in the area and/or coarse resolutions of forcing data for the GNOME model and oil weathering processes.
Satellite measurements (including both optical and SAR sen- sors) present an essential tool for oil detection and monitoring. If available, active optical sensor data, such as laser-induced fluorescence, can also be integrated with passive optical sen- sor data to detect oil spills, determine oil thickness, and track the sources of oil spills. Simulation of oil trajectories using hydrodynamic models acts as an important component of a contingency plan and marine resources management. Credible hydrodynamic models can provide insights into dynamics of oil spills and enable the evaluation of impacts of oil spills on the marine environment. To effectively and accurately predict and forecast an oil spill, it is strongly suggested that multi-  ple satellite observations and hydrodynamic models integrated. With sophisticated algorithms, such as artificial neural networks (Taravat and Del Frate 2012), to classify oil spill and measure oil thickness, the efficiency of rapid responses for emergency oil
spills can be significantly improved, and more active strategies to combat oil spills can be made.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to thank NASA for providing MODIS data and Ocean Biology Processing Group for providing the SeaDAS software package. We would like to give our appreciation to NOAA for providing VIIRS data. We also want to thank the University of Wisconsin for providing the Community Satellite Processing Package. We thank reviewers for their suggestions to improve the manuscript.
