<title>Influence of surface area of counter electrodes in electro-denitration process</title>
<author>Satyabrata Mishra; Falix Lawrence; N.K. Pandey</author>
<Affiliation>Reprocessing R&D Division, Reprocessing Group, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam, 603102, India</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103420</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197020301724</URL>
Highlights
Surface area of counter electrode plays a vital role during electro-denitration process.
Energy loss in terms of current efficiency due to temperature rise was studied during electro-denitration.
Rate constants and order of reaction using anodes of different surface area were estimated.
Life assessment of a PET anode suggested electroplating is not a viable option under harsh experimental condition.
Abstract
Using anodes of different surface area with the same cathode, electrolytic reduction of 4 M HNO3 was carried out in constant current mode to quantify the energy loss due to temperature rise. Rate constants and enegy efficiencies were compared under applied current densities using anodes of different surface area. Based on the results, anodes with low surface area compared to the working electrode is not a suitable option during electrolytic denitration. Testing of a platinum electroplated titanium electrode as an anode for its life assessment suggested electroplating is not a viable option under harsh conditions, encountered in spent nuclear fuel reprocessing.
Keywords：Denitration；Reduction efficiency；Counter electrode；PET anode；Current efficiency
1. Introduction
Electrooxidation and reduction steps are major process steps in spent nuclear fuel reprocessing in aqueous media. Electrochemical techniques have been successfully applied to different processes such as fuel dissolution (Akihiko, 1990), partitioning of Pu (Nair et al., 1990), destruction of organic wastes by oxidizing them (Sini et al., 2011) and destruction of nitric acid in the raffinate by reducing it (Rutten et al., 1999). During the aqueous reprocessing of the spent nuclear fuels of Fast Breeder Reactors (FBRs), substantial amount of liquid waste is generated. Reduction of nitric acid to tackle corrosion related issues in waste storage tanks and reduction in volume are warranted for the liquid waste management (Satyabrata et al., 2015). Several methods have been adopted by various researchers for the denitration of highly radioactive waste solutions with electrochemical and chemical reduction processes being the significant ones (Fanning, 2000; Taylor et al., 1993). Chemical denitration with formaldehyde or formic acid (Healy, 1958; Evans, 1959; Satyabrata et al., 2010) as reductant have been studied in detail due to faster kinetics, better efficiency as well as economy of the process. Electro-denitration process is a slow process compared to chemical denitration but it operates safely with easy control over the entire process without the addition of external agents (Satyabrata et al., 2015; Schmieder and Kroebel, 1977; Suzuki et al., 1998). Selection of electrode material plays a vital role in electro-reduction process. Electrochemical reduction of nitrates has been carried out using various metallic electrodes including Pt (DeGrott and Koper, 2004; TYaPetrrii, 1998), Rh (Wasberg and Horanui, 1995), Pd (Li et al., 1988a), Cu (Bockis and Kim, 1997) and graphite. Cattarin (1992) studied the reduction of nitrate on Cu working electrode to nitrite at −1.1 V vs standard calomel electrode (SCE) and to ammonia at −1.4 V vs SCE with high yields, whereas Li et al. (1988b) used Ni, Pb, Zn and Fe cathodes and observed that all of them produced nitrite as the intermediate and ammonia as the final product. Kim et al. (2000) studied the reduction behavior of nitric acid using a glassy carbon fiber column electrode system. Electrochemical reaction below 2 M nitric acid was not observed by them, and above 2 M, the reduction could be achieved with a slow rate. In most of the denitration study platinum served as the anode material. However, the choice of platinum as an electrode material in electrochemical industries is limited due to its high cost even though it offers high conductivity, good electro catalytic activity, and excellent resistance to oxidation and corrosion. Platinized titanium is one amongst the improved variety of electrode materials in which the platinum film not only acts as an electrical conductor but also protects the base metal, allowing the electrodes to be used in highly corrosive environments (Mallika et al., 2007). As the demand for Pt electroplated over Ti (PET) anodes is on the rise in industrial electrochemical processes wherein high corrosive and radiation fields are envisaged, it is of paramount importance to test them rigorously and assess their performance for life prediction before employing them in plants. An application of PET anode in reprocessing plants of spent nuclear fuel from fast breeder reactor (FBRs) is in the electrochemical destruction of nitric acid from high-level liquid waste (HLLW) before waste fixing.
The effect of current density on the rate of destruction of acid and the performance evaluation of PET coupons of varying plating thickness was determined and reported by Mallika et al. (2007). During these studies, it was observed that the geometry and the surface area (SA) of the counter electrodes also play a crucial role in minimizing the evaporation losses in the cell by way of bringing down the temperature of the electrolyte at higher current densities.
Hence, a systematic study was undertaken to quantify the contribution by the counter electrodes or anodes to energy losses due to temperature rise during the denitration process in a two-electrode divided electrolytic cell configuration. Evaluating the performance of a Pt-modified Titanium anode (fabricated for pilot plant scale studies) in the continuous denitration process at various current densities envisaged for plant operation was yet another objective of the present work.
2. Material and experimental
An electrochemical cell assembly as shown in Fig. 1 was employed to study the influence of anode surface area on the denitration process, especially the heat generation during electrolysis. A Titanium (Ti) vessel with geometrical surface area 307 cm2 up to the liquid level served as the cathode. The catholyte was 275 mL of 4 M nitric acid (AR Grade), and anolyte was 165 mL acid of the same concentration contained in a porous ceramic diaphragm tube. The anode was inserted into a porous porcelain diaphragm tube, which in turn was placed inside the Ti cathode vessel.
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the electrolytic cell for acid reduction experiments.
Four anodes of different surface areas were used, out of which two of them (A and C) were Pt-10% Ir electrodes. The other two (B and D) were platinum electroplated titanium (PET) anodes fabricated from Ti mesh, welded to Ti stems of about 2 mm dia and electroplated with Pt deposition thickness of about 8 μm. Also electroplated anode-D with two different deposition thickness 5 and 10 μm was fabricated for their life assessment. The electrodes were procured from M/s. Ti Anode fabricators, Chennai. The schematic diagrams of the 4 anodes (SA: 19, 37, 54 and 155 cm2) employed in the study are shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of different surface area of anodes.
A DC mode power supply was used for providing the required electrical energy to the cell. Constant current electro-reduction experiments were conducted. The voltage of the cell using multimeter and temperature in both compartments using a thermometer were measured during the experiment at regular intervals. The initial concentration of the acid and the acidity during the experiment were analyzed accurately using a Metrohm auto titroprocessor.
Batch mode electro-reduction experiments were carried out till a final acidity of 0.5 M with all the four anodes at two cathodic current densities, 40 and 50 mA cm−2. At the termination of experiment, final acidity at cathode being very low (~0.5 M) leads to increase in resistance and subsequent rise in cell voltage and temperature.
Similarly, for the life assessment of the Pt-modified Ti anode, electro-reduction of 4 M HNO3 was carried out in continuous mode using a cell set up as shown in Fig. 3. The procedure for the continuous mode experiments was similar as per our earlier study (Satyabrata et al., 2015). For the purpose of testing and predicting the service life, a titanium pipe anode with 4 mm holes on 10 square pitch, electroplated with Pt to a thickness of 8 μm and having the surface area of about 780 cm2 was fabricated. This electrode was tested continuously in an electrolytic cell with a catholyte volume of 3150 ml, for the reduction of 4 M nitric acid at high anodic current densities. For the purpose of evaluating its service life, the electrode was employed as an anode in the acid killing experiments at very high CD values ranging from 100 to 150 mA cm−2. After attaining the steady-state concentration in the cell, samples of catholyte and anolyte were subjected to ICP-OES analysis to determine the amount of Pt (if any) from the anode.
Fig. 3. Electrolytic cell setup for denitration in continuous mode.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Electro-reduction of 4 M HNO3 using anodes of different surface area
As the reduction of nitric acid is under kinetic as well as diffusion control (Satyabrata et al., 2015), by considering the reduction efficiency and current efficiency, incremental current experiments were carried out at cathodic current density in the range 40–50 mA cm−2 using individual anodes of different surface area. Mechanical stirring was provided to minimize the polarization effects.
The parameters such as cell potential, temperature, and acidity in both compartments were measured at the time of sampling. The variation in acidities in cathode compartments and the rise in temperature in anode compartments at different current densities (40 & 50 mA cm−2) using each anodes of different SA are compared in Fig. 4, Fig. 5.
Fig. 4. Comparison of variation in catholyte acidity and anolyte temperature using anodes of different SA at 40 mA cm−2 (Plots are trend line).
Fig. 5. Comparison of variation in catholyte acidity and anolyte temperature using anodes of different SA at 50 mA cm−2.
In all experiments, volume reduction owing to gaseous product (NOx and O2) formation and vaporization loss owing to the heating of the cell were observed in both compartments, be it catholyte or anolyte. To maintain a constant surface area of both compartments, required volume of water was added to catholyte and anolyte.
In all experiments, irrespective of the anode surface area increase in current density resulted in improvement of reduction efficiency. At 40 mA cm−2, the overall time required was 4 h for the final acidity to reach 0.5 M compared to 3–3.5 h with higher current density of 50 mA cm−2. However, substantial temperature rise could be observed at higher current density.
The concentration of acid determined experimentally at the cathodic current density 50 mA cm− 2 was plotted against time for all the four anodes in Fig. 6. The dependence of SA of the anodes on the heat generation in terms of temperature rise in anolyte at the current densities 40 and 50 mA cm−2 is depicted in Fig. 7.
Fig. 6. Concentration of acid vs. time during reduction with different anodes.
Fig. 7. Maximum temperature reached using anodes of different surface area.
The rate equation for HNO3 reduction at cathode can be expressed as
@(1)
where V is the volume of the catholyte, Ac is the cathode surface area; CA is the acid concentration of catholyte; iA is the cathodic current density, z is the number of electrons involved in the electro-denitration process and F is the Faraday constant. Alternatively, the rate can be written as
@(2)
where m is the order of the reaction and k is the rate constant. The rate of destruction could be computed theoretically by making use of equations (1), (2) and is shown as lines in Fig. 6. The linearity of the plots indicates that electrolytic destruction of nitric acid follows zero order reaction kinetics.
But for the precise estimation of rate constants and order of reaction with different anodes, the temperatures measured over the time range 1.5–4 h and 1.5–3 h at 40 and 50 mA cm−2, respectively can be assumed to be almost constant. Based on this assumption, the rate constants and order of reactions calculated are presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Estimation of rate constant and order of reaction using different anodes at both current densities.
Fig. 6 indicates only a marginal difference amongst the four anodes regarding their functioning in terms of acidity reduction. However, it will be better if we compare the current efficiency of the electro-denitration process using the four different anodes. The procedure for the calculation of current efficiency using the experimental data in Table 2 for a particular experiment is given below.
Table 2. Experimental data for electro reduction using anode-A (19 cm2) at a cathodic current density 40 mA cm−2.
The number of moles of acid that will be reduced by the passage of current theoretically and the actual number of moles destroyed experimentally can be calculated from Table 2. Current efficiency is the ratio of the number of moles of acid actually destroyed to the number of moles that will be reduced or destroyed theoretically.
As the electro-reduction of nitric acid involves many competing reactions occurring simultaneously, the average number of electrons involved in the process is assumed to be 1.5 (Mallika et al., 2007). So, theoretically 1.5 F or 1,44,750 coulombs of electricity is required for the reduction of 1 mol of nitric acid. From Table 2, if we consider both initial and final value for acidity as well as volume in catholyte, the number of moles of nitric acid destroyed experimentally is 0.957 mol (if addition of water during experiment is not considered). From Table 2, during experiment 12 ampere current was passed for 3.75 h which corresponds to 1.68 F and should destroy 1.12 mol of nitric acid in catholyte theoretically. Hence, current efficiency or energy efficiency of the process was calculated to be 85.5%. Similarly, if we consider the water addition in catholyte during experiment to account for the evaporation loss due to temperature rise, the energy efficiency of the process was calculated to be 82.7%.
The current efficiency obtained using different anodes at both current densities along with average temperature recorded in cathode as well as anode compartments are summarized in Table 3. It appears that the performance of Pt anodes (A and C) is slightly better than that of PET anodes (B and D) in terms of current efficiency as could be seen from Table 3. The rather high value of the current efficiency of the process with the anode of SA 19 cm2 could be due to the high evaporation loss arising as a result of the large increase in temperature.
Table 3. Average temperature and efficiency for the electro-reduction process with different anodes measured at different current densities.
SA: Surface area of anode, TA and TC: Temperature of anolyte and catholyte, *Current efficiency: Addition of water towards evaporation loss was considered.
Since the volume of water added during electrolysis to the cell with anode A for maintaining fixed volume was higher than that with anodes of larger surface area (owing to the high temperature and ensued vaporization loss), the acid became diluted and hence, the current efficiency calculated were marginally higher for the cell with anode A. However, to minimize the energy loss resulting from IR heating, it is required to employ the counter electrode (anode) with SA as large as possible.
Fig. 7 reveals that SA of the counter electrode plays a vital role in increasing the temperature of the cell. Higher surface area implies lower current density for anode, which facilitates the reduction of the quantity of heat generated, thereby minimizing the evaporation loss in the cell.
3.2. Life assessment of PET electrode
Longer life and good adherence of Pt plating are expected from the PET electrodes for serving as anodes in the continuous electro-reduction of nitric acid (4 M) as these electrodes will be in contact with 4 M nitric acid under high temperature conditions.
The anode D (155 cm2) in the study, described in the earlier section had a Pt thickness of 8 μm and resulted in minimum heat generation as well as evaporation loss in the cell during the electro-reduction experiment. To assess the service life of plating under severe condition, two more Pt electroplated Ti anodes of surface area 155 cm2 with plating thickness 5 and 10 μm were procured. Their performance was tested for electro-reduction experiment using 4 M HNO3 in continues mode at a very high current density of 150 mA cm−2. The electrodes with plating thickness 5, 8 and 10 μm failed after working for 340 and 440 and 430 h respectively due to the delamination of Pt layer. The lower service life at higher plating thickness suggest that adherence of Pt on Ti may be poor as plating thickness increases.
Based on the above result a bigger Pt electroplated Ti anode (780 cm2) with plating thickness of 8 μm was fabricated for testing in bench scale. The performance of PET anode is compared in Fig. 8.
Fig. 8. Performance of PET anode (SA: 780 cm2) during continuous flow experimental runs.
From Fig. 8, it could be revealed that, at all applied current densities a steady state concentration around 1.2 M HNO3 is achieved after a continuous denitration of 10–12 h. The anode performed very well up to 150 mA cm−2. However, the temperatures recorded at the current densities values of 100, 125 and 150 mA cm−2 were 74, 90 and 101 °C respectively and the electrode failed after working for about 450 h totally (25 h at 100 mA cm−2, 25 h at 125 mA cm−2 and 400 h at 150 mA cm−2). After each 25 h of analysis at 100 and 125 mA cm−2, the anolyte was given for ICP-OES analysis and the Pt concentration was below detection limit. Similarly, when continues electro-reduction was carried out at 150 mA cm−2, sampling was done at intervals of 25 h for analysis of platinum in anolyte. The results are plotted in Fig. 9.
Fig. 9. Variation of Pt concentration in anolyte during electro-reduction experiment.
As observed at lower current density, the Pt concentration in anolyte up to 150 h was below detection limit. But after 200 h, the Pt layer on the electrode started delaminating. With time the Pt concentration in anolyte increased and attained a steady concentration after 350 h. The high anodic current density value of 150 mA cm−2 and the ensued temperature rise in the cell could be the reason for anode to delaminate. Therefore, for use under aggressive conditions of acidity and radioactivity, it is desirable to vacuum anneal the PET anodes for enabling the diffusion of surface Pt atoms into the bulk Ti matrix, thereby extending their life (Kamachi Mudali et al., 2000).
4. Conclusion
Electrolytic destruction of nitric acid from 4 M to near neutral conditions at different current densities were carried out in a divided cell assembly using counter electrodes of different surface area. Though the efficiency of the reduction process was more or less same with the four anodes, the temperature rise of the cell during electrolysis was significantly reduced by using the anode of highest SA of 155 cm2. A PET anode of SA 780 cm2 was tested in continuous acid killing experiments at CD values 100, 125 and 150 mA cm−2 to facilitate its performance evaluation. The electrode failed in its functioning after serving for about 450 h, and the cause of the failure was attributed to the delamination of Pt from the surface. Hence, to extend the life of PET anodes under harsh conditions of acidity and CD, diffusion annealed electrodes with maximum surface area should be employed.
Author contribution
Satyabrata Mishra: Principal investigator, Original draft preparation. Falix Lawrence: Support in commissioning of experimental set up and involvement in experimental analysis. N.K. Pandey: Supervision, Reviewing and editing
