<title>Assessment of lead tellurite glass for immobilizing electrochemical salt wastes from used nuclear fuel reprocessing</title>
<author>Brian J. Riley; Jared O. Kroll; Jacob A. Peterson; David A. Pierce; William L. Ebert; Benjamin D. Williams; Michelle M.V. Snyder; Steven M. Frank; Jaime L. George; Karen Kruska</author>
<Affiliation>Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99354, United States;Energy Northwest, Richland, WA 99354, United States;Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, United States;Idaho National Laboratory, Idaho Falls, ID 83402, United States</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1016/j.jnucmat.2017.08.037</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311517305561</URL>
Keywords:Tellurite glass;Strontium chloride;Pyroprocessing;Oxide reduction
1. Introduction
Pyroprocessing is one of the options for recycling the usable actinide fraction remaining in used nuclear fuel (UNF) back into the fuel cycle. Pyroprocessing is a technique where UNF is dissolved in molten salt within an electrorefiner and the uranium, or uranium and plutonium, are electrolytically reduced and recovered at the cathode [1]. Different salts are used for the reduction of oxide fuel and electrorefining operations: a LiCl-Li2O oxide reduction (OR) salt is used to reduce oxide fuel prior to electrorefining and a eutectic mixture of LiCl-KCl (60%–40% by mole, respectively) is used as the electrorefining (ER) salt. Metallic fuel is placed directly into the LiCl-KCl eutectic salt for electrorefining. When the salt composition becomes unsuitable for efficient operation, a portion of the used salt is removed from the electrorefiner and replaced with new or recycled salt. Actinides and lanthanides can be removed from the waste salt to be discarded (drawn-down) and the decontaminated salt placed back in the electrorefiner. Then, the unused portion of the salt requires disposal or immobilization in a waste form.
A few options have been identified that can be used for immobilizing the salt waste and one of those is the glass-bonded sodalite ceramic waste form (CWF) [2]. Sodalite has the general formula
[M = Na+, Li+, K+, A = Cl−, I−, OH−], which is ideal for waste salt containing both alkali and halides and it can be made by mixing salt with zeolites, with aqueous solutions (e.g., NaAlO2, colloidal silica), through nepheline precursors, or solvent-alkoxide solutions using hydrothermal, sol-gel, and room-temperature synthesis routes [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]. In the CWF, a glass binder is used to both encapsulate the sodalite and immobilize the fission products that are not incorporated in the sodalite crystal structure (e.g., rare earths, actinides, alkaline earths, and a portion of the alkali metals).
Another waste form option is glass. While borosilicate glasses have been demonstrated as viable hosts for the wide range of radionuclides present in defense wastes [8], [9], halides are only slightly soluble in borosilicates and retentions are low at the high processing temperatures required to process these glasses [10]. Recently, tellurite glasses have been evaluated for mixed-salt immobilization due to the much higher halite solubilities and lower processing temperatures [11], [12]. Tellurite glasses have higher loading capacities for mixed-chloride salts than any waste glass evaluated to date (that the authors are aware of). The primary drawback to tellurite glass is that TeO2 is very rare in the earth's crust and expensive.
Early scoping studies [12], [13] evaluating the use of tellurite glass to immobilize electrochemical salts were aimed at identifying simple binary or ternary systems that could be made into glass. For the initial study, TeO2 was mixed with the following additives: PbO, P2O5, WO3, ZnO, Al2O3+B2O3, V2O5, Bi2O3, CuO, and Fe2O3. The most promising systems were selected based on homogeneity, meltability, and low volatility during melting.
The five tellurite glass systems chosen for further study were: PbO, Al2O3+B2O3, WO3, P2O5, and ZnO based on available glass-formation regions [14], [15], [16], [17], [18] and favorable properties during glass fabrication and characterization described in more detail elsewhere [13]. These were studied further by making glasses with 10 mass% of a surrogate waste salt representing LiCl-KCl eutectic salt containing fission products from the processing of multiple fuel batches, which we refer to as ER salt. Glasses made with and without the surrogate ER salt were subjected to the ASTM C1285 [19] product consistency test (PCT-B) method to assess the chemical durability. The results from that study indicated that the TeO2-PbO system was the most promising based on low normalized releases of chloride (NLCl = 0.528 g m−2) after a 7-day test at 90 °C in a Teflon™ vessel [12], [13].
Additionally, a series of binary TeO2-PbO glasses were made with 16–22 mass% PbO to determine the optimal glass-forming region (see Fig. 1 [11], [20], [21]) and salt loading limits. A number of characterization techniques were applied to evaluate the structure, chemistry, microstructure, and chemical durability of the TeO2-PbO glasses made with different ER salt loadings [11]. Glasses made with <22 mass% PbO (>78 mass% TeO2) were highly crystalline and volatilization was observed during the melting process. Thus, to minimize the salt volatility during processing, the baseline composition of 22 mass% (13.78 mol%) PbO in TeO2 was used for future studies (henceforth referred to as the 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass composition).
Fig. 1. TeO2-PbO phase diagram showing the glass-formation region (GFR) as the shaded gray area (after Paul [20]). Here, “A” denotes Te4PbO9 and “B” denotes Te3Pb2O8. Temperatures at critical locations on the diagram are listed in blue. The binary TeO2-PbO glass used in this study (78%TeO2-22%PbO, by mass) as well as those made by the authors in previous studies [11], [21] are shown as vertical lines including T2G-21d (16% PbO), T2G-21c (18%PbO), and T2G-21b (20% PbO) (values listed in mass%). Characteristic temperatures at key locations are provided in blue text in °C. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
A variety of microstructures were observed at different ER salt loadings in this 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass system using optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). In glasses made with 14 and 15 mass% salt loadings, phase separation was observed at the nano- and macro-scales, respectively, leading to the appearance of a milky yellow-white phase (Fig. 2). The glass made with 10 mass% ER salt remained homogeneous at TEM resolutions, but phase separation was observed at the ∼10-nm scale in the glass made with 14 mass% ER salt. The size of the phase-separated regions continued to increase with higher salt loadings (Fig. 2c) [11].
Fig. 2. (a) Optical micrograph of 15 mass% ER salt 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass. (b) SEM micrograph of the same glass taken from the milky yellow-white phase-separated region on the top of the glass shown in (a). (c) TEM micrographs of 78%TeO2-22%PbO glasses containing 10, 14, and 17.5 mass% ER salt. (d) Selected area diffraction patterns of samples shown in (c). Note that these micrographs were taken from McCloy et al. [11] and are included here with permission from the American Chemical Society. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
The work presented here includes studies to investigate the solubilities of SrCl2, OR salt, and a different ER salt [ER(SF)] than what was used in previous studies pertaining to 78%TeO2-22%PbO glasses. The salt-loading capacities of each system were evaluated by characterizing the microstructures, and, for glasses made with ER(SF) and OR salts, by measuring the chemical durabilities.
2. Methods
2.1. Glass fabrication
Each tellurite glass composition was batched at a targeted 20-g final mass using high-purity constituents (≥99%, Alfa Aesar). The batched powders were milled in a Diamonite™ mortar and pestle (MP100, Products Manufacturing) and loaded into a Pt/10%Rh crucible. A lid was added on top of the crucible and then placed into a pre-heated furnace (Deltech, Inc., Denver, CO) for melting. Each glass was melted at a processing temperature (Tm) selected to minimize volatility while allowing for adequate mixing of the components based on visual observations made periodically during processing and after quenching.
2.1.1. Making glasses with SrCl2 and OR salt
For the glasses made with SrCl2 and OR salt, the individual reagents (≥99.5% purity, Alfa Aesar, Haverhill, MA) were mixed with appropriate amounts of TeO2 and PbO to obtain the target compositions shown in Table 1. Glasses were melted for 20 min at the Tm values shown in Table 1 and quenched on a quartz plate.
Table 1. Summary of glass compositions in mass% (as-batched) and melting temperatures (Tm,°C) for each glass.
2.1.2. Making ER(SF) salt glasses
2.1.2.1. Salt simulant preparation
The ER(SF) salt simulant was made starting with high-purity (≥99.99%) anhydrous salts from either Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) or Alfa Aesar and all work was done in an Ar-atmosphere glovebox. All salt components were mechanically mixed in a large polyethylene container and then poured into two alumina crucibles (4.6 × 15.2 cm). The crucibles were placed into a furnace (Applied Test Systems, Butler, PA) and heated to 550 °C for ∼1 h. The molten salt was then poured from the crucible onto a stainless steel tray and cooled. The salt was collected and ground to a powder using a grinder (Mazzer, Venezia, Italy) and remixed. A second melt of the salt was performed similarly to the first melt, the salt was collected, ground to a powder, and mechanically mixed. The homogeneity of the salt was confirmed by analyzing a sample in different regions with EDS. The composition of the salt measured using ICP-MS is provided elsewhere [22]. This ER(SF) salt was stored in a nitrogen glovebox until used in glass fabrication.
2.1.2.2. Glass fabrication
The ER(SF) glasses in Table 1 were fabricated in a similar way to the SrCl2 and OR salt glasses with the exception that an aliquot of the ER(SF) mixture was used instead of weighing out each salt constituent separately. For each glass, a weighed amount of the ER(SF) salt was added to a Diamonite mortar and pestle and ground to a fine powder. The proper amounts of the ER(SF) salt powder, TeO2, and PbO to make each glass were mixed and heated for 20 min at the selected temperature (Tm, see Table 1), and then poured onto a quartz quench plate. This resulted in a chunk of glass.
2.1.2.3. Glass annealing (cylinders)
Some glasses containing ER(SF) salt were cast into cylinders for use in ASTM C1308 chemical durability tests [23]. The glasses were fabricated in the same way as the chunks discussed in section 2.1.2.2, but instead of pouring the melt onto a quartz quench plate, each glass was cast in a cylindrical mold made from a 10 × 12 mm fused quartz tube with the bottom end sealed. The filled mold was placed into an annealing oven set to dwell at 315 °C for 5 h and then cooled at 1 °C min−1. Once cooled to room temperature, the cylinders of glass were removed from the quartz tubes and prepared for durability tests. These glasses were given a “C” designation to indicate they were cast as a cylinder.
2.2. Glass characterization
2.2.1. Density
The average bulk densities, ρb, were determined by measuring the volumes and masses of glass chunks made with each salt. The volumes of each glass were measured with glass chunks using a He pycnometer (Micromeritics AccuPyc II 1340, Norcross, GA) through a series of 5 purges and 10 measurements that were averaged. Mass values were measured with an XPE205 analytical balance (Mettler Toledo) and then the pycnometer software outputted the ρb values with associated standard deviation.
2.2.2. Glass transition temperature
The glass transition temperature (Tg) was determined for most of the glasses using an SDT Q600 differential thermal analyzer (DTA, TA Instruments New Castle, DE). For each glass, ∼25 mg of sample was loaded into an alumina crucible, placed into the instrument, and the chamber was closed. Compressed air was flowed into the system at 100 mL min−1 and, after the mass stabilized, the system was heated at 10 °C min−1 to 500 °C. The Tg values were determined as the onset values from the DTA plots.
2.2.3. Powder X-ray diffraction
Powder X-ray diffraction (P-XRD) was performed using a Bruker® D8 Advance (Bruker AXS Inc., Madison, WI) equipped with a Cu Kα target at 40 kV and 40 mA to detect crystal formation. The instrument has a LynxEye™ position-sensitive detector with a range of 3° 2θ. Scan parameters were 5–70° 2θ with a step of 0.009° 2θ and a 0.6–2-s dwell at each step. Bruker AXS DIFFRACplus EVA and Bruker AXS Topas software were used to identify and quantify crystalline phases, respectively. Quantification was performed according to the fundamental parameters approach [24].
2.2.4. Scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
SEM analysis was performed with a JSM-7001F field-emission gun microscope (JEOL USA, Inc. Peabody, MA) using a backscattered electron (BSE) detector for atomic number contrast. Some as-made glass samples were placed on double-stick carbon tape adhered to Al stubs and some of the glasses following chemical durability tests were mounted in epoxy and polished with glycol-based diamond suspensions so a cross-section could be observed. Then, each sample was sputter-coated with Pt (Polaron Range SC7640, Quorum Technologies Ltd., East Sussex, England). Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis was performed with a Bruker xFlash® 6|60 spectrometer (Bruker AXS Inc., Madison, WI).
2.2.5. Transmission electron microscopy
Samples were prepared for TEM by taking a small amount of powdered specimen and placing it on a lacy carbon grid resting on a glass slide. A second glass slide was used to press the specimen gently into the lacey carbon to make it adhere. Any excess powder was subsequently removed by turning the grid upside down. This method is preferred over solution drop casting because it minimizes any carbon contamination from solvents used to drop cast. Samples were analyzed in TEM mode in a JEOL ARM200CF aberration-corrected TEM operated at 200 kV with a beam current of 2 μA. A 70-μm or smaller condenser aperture was used in order to minimize beam damage. Fresh regions were used for each image acquisition to minimize artifacts in the images due to beam-particle interactions. Micrographs were taken with condensed beams and uncondensed beams in an attempt to collect artifact-free images.
2.2.6. Chemical durability
2.2.6.1. ASTM-C1285 (PCT-B) tests
The ASTM C1285 Method A (PCT-A) [19] was developed to evaluate the chemical durability of waste glasses using a short-term test that could be conducted in a hot cell. It is essentially a partial dissolution test in which the fractional mass that dissolves under tightly-controlled conditions is compared to a benchmark value to determine acceptability. The ASTM C1285 Method B (PCT-B) [19] allows for variations in the test parameter values to study the dissolution behavior. We conducted series of tests in which only the reaction time was varied to measure the dissolution rate as the solution composition and glass surface properties evolved.
The PCT-B [19] experiments were run on a series of the OR salt glasses. Chunks of each glass were crushed using a tungsten carbide puck and sieved to separate particles in the size range of +75/-150 μm (−100 + 200 mesh) for use in the experiments. Once sieved, they were washed with cyclohexane 3 times in an ultrasonic bath to remove fines from the glass particles without dissolving any unincorporated salt. Separate tests were run in Teflon™ vessels at 90 °C for durations of 1, 7, 28, 56, 91, and 328 days in deionized water (DIW) at a 1:10 m:V ratio where m ∼ 1.5 g and V ∼ 15 mL.
Following the tests, un-filtered aliquots were taken from each reactor in order to measure the pH. The remaining solution from each reactor was filtered and divided into two aliquots. The first aliquot was used for I and Cl analyses and the second was preserved with 1 vol% concentrated HNO3 (Sigma-Aldrich Optima) and used for all other elemental analyses.
Analyses of major cations were performed on an ICP optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES). High-purity standards were used to generate calibration curves and verify that the calibration was maintained during the analytical run. The method used is similar to EPA SW-846 Method 6010C [25]. Trace elemental analysis was performed by ICP-MS following a method similar to EPA SW-846 6020A [26]. For both methods, serial dilutions were made to investigate and correct for matrix interferences. Solutions were analyzed for anions using a Dionex ion chromatograph (IC). Major anions (including Cl) were separated on a Dionex AS17C column with a gradient elution of 1–35 mM KOH and quantified using a conductivity detector. Then, normalized mass losses (NLi) were calculated using Equation (1), where ci is the measured concentration of the element “i” in the test solution, g L−1, fi is the mass fraction of the element “i” in the glass, S is the total surface area (m2) of the glass used in the test calculated by modeling the particles as spheres [19], and VL is the volume (L) of solution used in the test. Differences in the NLi values calculated with different elements indicate the degree of non-stoichiometry in the dissolution process.
@(1)
2.2.6.2. ASTM-C1308 tests
The ASTM C1308 tests were conducted to evaluate the degradation processes of glasses made with ER(SF) salt. These tests indicate the relative importance of surface dissolution and diffusion processes as well as whether residual salt phases remain as inclusions in the glass.
The ASTM C1308 [23] test procedure and results are presented in more detail elsewhere [27] but are summarized here. The cylinders of ER(SF)-loaded TeO2-PbO glasses were cut into 1.5-mm thick discs using a diamond saw and absolute ethanol as the cutting fluid. The faces of the discs were polished using 240–600 grit sandpaper with absolute ethanol as the lubricant. Individual coupons were placed on Teflon support grids in Teflon vessels, to which DIW was added to attain glass surface area-to-solution volume (S/V) ratios of either 2 or 120 m−1. The sealed vessels were placed into a convection oven at 90 °C.
While data were collected at both S/V ratios, only the tests run at 2 m−1 are discussed here. The data collected at S/V = 120 m−1 were used to confirm surface dissolution qualitatively, but the values carry higher uncertainties. Those data are discussed elsewhere [27].
After the desired test intervals, vessels were removed from the oven, weighed, opened, and the solution poured carefully into two tared solution bottles for composition and pH analysis. The specimen was removed from the vessel when the solution was removed, but not dried. The specimen was placed back into the vessel, which was then refilled with fresh leachant to match the original mass of the test. The vessel was recapped, tightly sealed, and placed back into the oven to continue the test. Test solutions were replaced daily for 11 consecutive intervals and then after two 7-day intervals. The total time required for solution replacement was typically <2 min. For the two solutions collected at each interval, the pH and Cl− concentrations in one were measured using combination of pH and ion-selective electrodes, respectively, and the other solution was acidified with HNO3 (Optima) prior to analysis with ICP-MS.
The C1308 results can be evaluated using incremental or cumulative responses. The incremental normalized release (NLi) of element “i” of interest during interval “j” was calculated using Equation (1). The cumulative normalized release (NLi,c) of element “i” through the n-th interval is simply the sum of the NLi values for each interval and calculated using Equation (2).
@(2)
2.2.7. Determining composition of inclusion phase in 15%ER15 glass
A lead-tellurite glass was made with 15 mass% of a different ER salt composition, shown in Table 2, and melted at 700 °C for 20 min. This glass, referred to as 15%ER15 [28], was observed to be phase separated. A sample containing the phase-separated region of the glass was prepared for the PCT-B [19] in the same fashion as all other glasses (described in section 2.2.6.1), but a PCT was not run. Rather, the prepared glass was soaked for 24 h in DIW at a 1:10 m:V (g:mL) ratio within a Teflon autoclave at room temperature. Based on the high water solubility of each constituent of the ER15 salt simulant [28], it was expected that chloride present in the droplet phase and exposed at the particle surfaces would readily dissolve during this experiment. The leachate recovered was analyzed with ICP-MS to see what elements were preferentially released from the droplet phase.
Table 2. Composition (mass%) of 15%ER15 salt glass [28].
2.3. Physical property models
After gathering ρb and Tg literature data for tellurite glasses with SciGlass (v7.1; ITC, Inc.) software, composition-property models were generated with a least-squares-regression approach using JMP (v13.0.0; SAS Institute, Inc.) software to predict the composition-property effects for specific volume (v or ρb−1) and Tg; the full details for these models are presented elsewhere [29]. For these models, component coefficients were only generated for species that were present in ≥5 glasses and were shown to be statistically significant. A summary of the component coefficients, if available, for oxides and chlorides of Te, Pb, alkalis, and alkaline earths is provided in Table 3.
Table 3. Summary of v and Tg model coefficients (vi and Tg,i, respectively) and number of glasses (M and N, respectively) for oxides and chlorides of Te, Pb, alkalis, and alkaline earths from a composition-property model presented elsewhere [29]. Coefficients are based on per-component-mass-fraction additions. Included are the crystal radii for the 8-coordinated alkali and alkaline earths metals according to Shannon [34].
Using vi and Tg,i model coefficients from Table 3, v (ρb−1) and Tg values were predicted as vp (ρb,p−1) and Tg,p for a given glass composition using Equations (3), (4), respectively, where mi was the mass fraction of each component in the glass, and M and N were the number of components and the glass, respectively.
@(3)
@(4)
Since very few component coefficients were available for the chlorides, comparisons were primarily made looking changes in ρb,p and Tg,p values for the baseline 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass as well as for the baseline glass composition with 5 or 10 mass% additions of alkali oxides or alkaline earth oxides.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Appearance and phase analysis
Pictures and P-XRD patterns for the different sets of glasses can be found in Fig. 3, Fig. 4, respectively. The binary glass without salt had detectable lead tellurite crystals (Fig. 4a) but all of the other glasses appeared X-ray amorphous.
Fig. 3. Pictures of 78%TeO2-22%PbO glasses without salt (0%) and with varying amounts of SrCl2, OR, and ER(SF) salt loadings. All percentages are in mass%.
Fig. 4. P-XRD patterns for (a) 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass including a picture of a lead tellurite crystal from a previous 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass [13], (b) ER(SF), (c) SrCl2, and (d) OR salt glasses. In all cases, a background fit to the 0% salt glass is included as an intensity-corrected pattern shape reference.
3.1.1. SrCl2 glasses
The glasses containing 5–17.5 mass% SrCl2 were a light orange color, and the glasses with 25 and 30 mass% SrCl2 were a light yellow-orange color. The glasses with 25 and 30 mass% SrCl2 appeared to contain multiple phases based on visual appearance, although no crystals were detected with P-XRD (Fig. 4b) or SEM (not shown). This revealed that these features did not have any long-range order and might be flow patterns present on the top of the glass due to amorphous phase separation following the quenching procedure. The amorphous structure changed with increasing salt loadings as seen by the broadening of the amorphous humps in the P-XRD patterns, which is evidence of greater perturbations of the glass network.
3.1.2. OR salt glasses
The OR salt glasses were orange-red in color up to the 22.5% salt-loaded glass, in which a white-pink phase was observed. The OR salt glasses with salt loadings of >10 mass% were increasingly hygroscopic based on visual appearance, but the 10 mass% glass seemed to remain dry under ambient humidity. While all of the glasses were amorphous based on P-XRD analyses (Fig. 4c), amorphous-peak broadening was observed for these glasses at increased salt loadings and this was attributed to glass network perturbations.
Phase separation was observed for the OR salt glasses with ≥18 mass% OR salt at very small scales (∼50 nm, Fig. 5), which was far more dispersed than that observed with the ER salt in previous studies [11]. The scale of the secondary phase increased at OR salt loadings of 25 and 30 mass% (Fig. 5) and, while the diffraction patterns were X-ray amorphous (Fig. 4c), the ordered appearance of this phase suggests that it is crystalline. It is possible that the secondary phase was comprised of nanocrystalline features with no long-range order.
Fig. 5. (a) TEM micrograph of the 15%OR glass. (b–e) BSE-SEM micrographs of (b,c) 18%OR at different magnifications, (d) 25%OR, and (e) 30%OR glasses. The phase separation for the 18%OR glass is seen as small dark spots within the glassy matrix shown in (c).
3.1.3. ER(SF) salt glasses
The ER(SF) glasses were dark red and phase separation was observed at 15 mass% salt loading (Fig. 3) where a yellow-white phase was seen on the top surface and throughout the bulk of some quenched glass pieces. A similar phase separation was observed previously in the 15 mass% ER15 glass [28] and in the 15 mass% ER glass presented by McCloy et al. [11] (see Fig. 2a), and thus, the phase-separated 15%ER(SF) glass was not characterized in detail. A TEM micrograph of the 15%ER(SF) glass is shown in Fig. 6 where the phase-separated droplets can be seen as dark inclusions approximately 5 nm in diameter. All of the glasses analyzed were X-ray amorphous as seen in the P-XRD patterns (Fig. 4d). Unlike the patterns for the OR and SrCl2 salt glasses, the amorphous peak intensities do not decrease with increasing ER(SF) salt loadings and remain quite high, even for the 15%ER(SF) glass. These high amorphous peak intensities with increasing ER salt loadings have been observed before with similar ER salts in TeO2-PbO glasses [11].
Fig. 6. TEM micrograph of 15%ER(SF) glass showing the phase-separated droplets as the darker inclusion phase.
3.2. Compositional analysis after fabrication
The compositions of the 0% salt glass as well as glasses containing either 10 or 15 mass% of ER(SF), OR, and SrCl2 salts were measured with EDS and compared with the targeted values, following renormalization after removing Li (if present) and O. Fig. 7 provides comparisons for Te, Pb, and Cl, the only components found in all three sets of glasses. The targeted and measured compositions do vary up to a few mass% for some components. For the baseline glass without salt, the measured Te and Pb values were close to the target values with Te slightly lower and Pb slightly higher than targeted. For the glasses containing ER(SF) or OR salts, the measured Te values were higher than the targeted values whereas Pb and Cl values were lower, suggesting loss of Pb and Cl during melting. For the SrCl2-containing glasses, the measured Te values were lower than expected, the Pb values were close to targeted values, and the Cl values were higher than expected, providing evidence that some Te was lost during melting due to volatility.
Fig. 7. Comparison between targeted and measured (with EDS) glass compositions for (a) Te, (b) Pb, and (c) Cl for the 0% salt glass as well as 10 and 15 mass% of ER(SF), OR, and SrCl2 salts. Note that both sets of values were calculated by first omitting O and Li and then renormalizing. Error bars are included for measured values.
While the measured values do not exactly agree with the targeted values, EDS is not the most accurate nor precise technique available for measuring glass compositions and thus is used for indication purposes in this regard; EDS is effective for obtaining a high-level assessment of compositional homogeneity versus heterogeneity. However, these data do suggest that care should be taken to minimize volatile losses when working with tellurite glasses such as by optimizing Tm, mixing in additives to change thermoviscosity and/or thermal stability (e.g., Al2O3, GeO2) [13], [30] of the melt, and/or minimizing salt loading.
3.3. Measuring the inclusion phase in 15%ER15 glass
The compositions of the inclusion phases in the phase-separated 15%ER(SF), 15%ER [11], and 15%ER15 [28] glasses were difficult to measure due to the presence of Li and the electron beam sensitivity of the glasses. In an attempt to measure the composition of the droplet phase, powders of the 15%ER15 glass were soaked in DIW at room temperature for 1 day and the solution was analyzed with ICP-MS. The NLi results in Fig. 8 show that the major analytes present in that solution were K (NLK = 0.793 g m−2), Cl (NLCl = 0.593 g m−2), Li (NLLi = 0.272 g m−2), and Pb (NLPb = 0.044 g m−2), and thus, the droplets were comprised mostly of the LiCl-KCl eutectic salt. The incongruent NLi values show that some of the salt components were not effectively incorporated into the glass network at the higher salt loadings and, instead, formed as immiscible spherical droplets visible within the glass matrix.
Fig. 8. Semi-log data for leachate analysis (NLi) of 15%ER15 glass [28] following a 24-h soak at room temperature.
The differences between the ER15 and the ER(SF) salt compositions are not insignificant. The mass percentages of LiCl-KCl, NaCl, LnCl3, and Cs + Sr in the ER15 [28] and the ER(SF) salts are 93.15% vs 74.19%, 0% vs 9.66%, 6.85% vs 5.00%, and 0% vs 11.15%, respectively. These differences likely affect the compositions of the droplet phases formed in these materials, but the droplet phase was never investigated for the ER(SF) salt glasses directly.
3.4. Physical property measurements
3.4.1. Bulk density
Bulk density is an important waste form parameter because it can be used to predict the volume of space that a waste form will occupy in a repository. The ρb values measured for all the glasses are presented in Fig. 9a. The values decreased with increasing salt content for each set of glasses following a 2nd-order polynomial-type trend. Since the density of SrCl2 is relatively high at 3.09 × 103 kg m−3 [31], the range of densities measured for glasses made with SrCl2 was not as large as what was observed for the glasses made with OR and ER(SF) salts that are mostly LiCl (ρb = 2.068 × 103 kg m−3 [32]) and KCl (ρb = 1.984 × 103 kg m−3 [33]). For comparison, the measured ρb values for the SrCl2, OR, and ER(SF) glasses at the 10 mass% salt loading were 5.58 × 103 kg m−3, 4.93 × 103 kg m−3, and 5.12 × 103 kg m−3, respectively.
Fig. 9. (a) Bulk density (ρb) versus salt loading in 78%TeO2-22%PbO glasses; the 0% salt glass is provided for reference. (b) Changes in ρb with the addition of 5 or 10 mass% alkali or alkaline earth oxides to the 78%TeO2-22%PbO composition (calculated ρb = 6.129 × 103 kg m−3), using the models shown in Table 3, as a function of crystal radii (ri) of the metals at CN = 8 from Shannon [34]. A dotted line at Δ = 0 from the 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass is included for reference.
In an attempt to compare the data from the current study to literature data, model data from Table 3 were used. Since literature data on ρb for tellurite glasses containing chlorides was rather limited, data for oxides were used instead because the dataset was more complete and considering that a large portion of each salt in the current study consists of alkali and/or alkaline earth metals. Also, the salt components for which both oxide and chloride vi coefficients were available in Table 3, i.e., Li and Na, had comparable vi values for each (i.e., νLi2O = 0.6856 cm3 g−1 vs vLiCl = 0.4937 cm3 g−1,  νNa2O= 0.4843 cm3 g−1 vs vNaCl = 0.4739 cm3 g−1), providing justification for this comparison. The ρb,p values for simple ternary glasses with 5 or 10 mass% of alkali oxide or alkaline earth oxide additions and the Δρb values from the 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass (calculated ρb = 6.129 × 103 kg m−3) are presented in Fig. 9b. According to the data in these plots, the addition of any amount of either an alkali or alkaline earth oxide to the 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass should result in a decrease to ρb. The general trend is that the compositional effects on ρb compared to that of the 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass decrease as the crystal radius (ri, from Shannon [34]) of the alkali or alkaline earth increases, i.e., moving downward in Groups IA and IIA on the periodic table, respectively. It is important to note that oxides and chlorides (e.g., salts used in the current study) will behave differently, but adding either to the 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass will likely decrease the ρb.
3.4.2. Glass transition temperature
The Tg is an important glass property from a processing standpoint because it can be used to determine the proper annealing temperature of the glass to prevent cracking when the glass is cooled to room temperature. With adequate composition-property models, the Tg could be predicted for a given tellurite glass composition.
The Tg values for some of the glasses in each set of SrCl2, OR, and ER(SF) glasses are presented in Fig. 10a and all seem to fit fairly well to linear trendlines with different slopes. Not enough of some glasses remained to measure Tg after other characterizations were performed. The addition of SrCl2 to the 78%TeO2-22%PbO base glass led to a steady increase in the Tg.
Fig. 10. (a) Glass transition temperature (Tg) versus salt loading in 78%TeO2-22%PbO glasses; the 0% salt glass is provided for reference. (b) Changes in Tg with the addition of 5 or 10 mass% alkali or alkaline earth oxides to the 78%TeO2-22%PbO composition (calculated Tg = 297.4 °C), using the models shown in Table 3, as a function of crystal radii (ri) of the metals at CN = 8 from Shannon [34]. A dotted line at Δ = 0 from the 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass is included for reference.
The additions of OR and ER(SF) salt to the baseline glass resulted in steady decreases in Tg, but the OR salt had more of a decreasing (albeit minor) effect than the ER(SF) at comparable salt loadings. The 15%ER(SF) glass that phase separated did not fall in line with the other ER(SF) glasses and this was attributed the fact that two immiscible phases were present within the sample that was analyzed. The data available in the literature for the effects of alkali and alkaline earth chloride additions on the Tg of tellurite glass is limited. In a study by Rao and Bhat [35], a notable decrease in Tg was observed in TeO2-LiBO2-LiCl glasses with increasing LiCl content.
As a general comparison, using the Tg,i model coefficients in Table 3, the Tg,p values for simple ternary glasses with 5 or 10 mass% of an alkali oxide or alkaline earth oxide were calculated and the ΔTg values from the 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass (Tg,p = 297.3 °C) are presented in Fig. 10b. These data show that additions of alkali oxides or alkaline earth oxides to the 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass decrease or increase Tg, respectively. The general trend in Tg values is that the effect of adding alkali and/or alkaline earth oxides to the 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass decreases as ri of the alkali or alkaline earth increases, i.e., moving downward in Groups IA and IIA on the periodic table, respectively. This was previously documented by Nashida et al. for K-, Mg-, and Ba-TeO2 glasses [36]. It is important to note that oxides and chlorides (e.g., salts used in the current study) will have different influences on the glass properties, but oxides were used here for comparison because of the wealth of data available in the literature and considering a large portion of each salt in the current study consists of alkali and/or alkaline earth metals.
3.5. Chemical durability
3.5.1. ASTM C1285 experiments with OR salt glasses
The NLi values for the ASTM C1285 experiments on glasses with different OR salt loadings are shown as a function of time in Fig. 11. By comparing the NLi values for different species, it appears that Cl, Li, and Cs were not fully incorporated into the glass because releases were much higher than the releases for Te, Sr, and Pb (Fig. 11). These differences are more pronounced in Fig. 12, where a comparison is provided for the same leachates at the 328-day time point over the range of salt loadings. Here, the differences between NLi values for the various species are more apparent as well as how the releases increase exponentially for Cl, Li, and Cs as the salt loading is increased. The significant difference in the NLi values suggests that the glasses are multi-phase, even if that immiscibility cannot be observed microscopically. Interestingly, as the OR salt loading increased, the NLSr values decreased at the 328-day time point (see Fig. 12), suggesting a Sr-bearing secondary phase formed during the tests, although no such phase was detected by analysis of the test specimens. This is likely related to the Sr solubility limit in the testing solutions. Phase separation was observed in the OR salt glasses with ≥18 mass% OR salt and it is possible that phase separation occurs at salt loadings <18 mass% on a scale even smaller than can be observed that results in incongruent dissolution of the more soluble droplet phase, while the more durable glass phase does not dissolve.
Fig. 11. NLi values for OR salt glasses following C1285 (PCT-B) experiments shown over the full time scale. For Cl, Li, and Cs, trendlines are included as a guide to the eye. Note that Cl, Li, and Cs are plotted on a common scale while Sr, Te, and Pb are not due to different concentration ranges.
Fig. 12. Comparison of 328-day NLi values for OR salt glasses following C1285 (PCT-B) experiments.
It should be noted that since a fixed mass/volume was used for tests with all glasses, the S/V ratios were slightly different because of differences in densities of glasses made with different salt loadings. This was most significant for the glasses with higher fractions of OR salt. The 10%OR, 15%OR, and 18%OR salt glasses had densities of 4.929, 4.547, and 4.467 × 103 kg m−3, respectively. This translates to the 15%OR and 18%OR glasses having specific surface areas estimated to be 8% and 10% higher than that of the 10%OR glass. Differences in the glass densities were taken into account in the reported NLi values.
To provide a qualitative mass balance, samples of all of the glass were recovered following the 91-day ASTM C1285 tests for analysis. The glasses were dried, mounted in resin, polished in glycol suspensions to prevent further leaching, and analyzed with SEM-EDS. The SEM and elemental EDS maps for Te, Pb, and Cl can be found for the 10%OR and 18%OR glasses in Fig. 13. These data show the selective depletion of Cl from the TeO2-PbO matrix at the surface and cracks of the 18%OR specimen and, to a smaller degree, in the 10%OR specimen, most noticeably around the fracture in the upper right corner of the BSE-SEM micrograph. The particles had fractured around the exterior surfaces when crushed, with some cracks propagating deep into the bulk of the glass pieces. The preferential corrosion of glass around these cracks is evidenced by feather-like features seen during the SEM analysis. This indicates the cracks were generated when the glass was crushed and water had penetrated into the cracks during the test.
Fig. 13. SEM and Te, Pb, and Cl EDS maps of cross-sectioned glass pieces of (left) 10%OR and (right) 18%OR glasses after 91-day leaching in C1285 (PCT-B) experiments. The surfaces of each particle are on the left-hand side of the micrographs where the left-most region (black) is the resin in which they were mounted for cross-sectioning.
The cross section analyses were related to the solution results as follows. The curve in Fig. 14a shows the decrease in the volume of a spherical particle as the radius decreases when the glass dissolves. The particle had an initial 112-μm diameter representing the average of the −100 + 200 mesh size fraction. The symbols plotted in Fig. 14a represent the volumes of salt-loaded glasses remaining after the amount of glass corresponding to the measured Cl concentrations dissolved after 91 days and indicate the corresponding dissolved thickness. The dissolved glass thickness based on the shrinking sphere model provides an estimate for the Cl-depletion depth (dp) in a spherical particle. The NLCl values and corresponding dp values increased with increasing salt content.
Fig. 14. (a) Remaining glass volume calculated using the shrinking sphere model, related to dissolved glass thickness calculated based on (NLCl) for OR salt glasses with different salt loadings (denoted by labels) following the 91-day leach for C1285 (PCT-B) experiments. (b) Comparison of calculated and measured penetration depth (dp) in glass particles of different salt loadings for the 91-day leach for C1285 experiments.
It should be noted that the calculated values are based on a spherical particle model, whereas these glasses do not form spheres when crushed, but rather elongated wafers (see Riley et al. [12]). Nevertheless, the relationship between the dissolved volume and dissolved thickness is not very sensitive to the particle shape for low to moderate volumes.
A comparison between the measured and calculated values is presented in Fig. 14b. The measured values are expected to be less than the calculated values because the outer surfaces of particles retreat as some of the TeO2-PbO matrix dissolves, but the amount of glass that dissolved is negligible based on NLTe. The measured and modelled Cl depletion depths are in fair agreement. The release of a fraction of the Cl that is not contained in the glass (i.e., from salt inclusions) probably resulted in predicted values being higher than the measured dp values. If this is the case, Fig. 14b indicates larger fractions are not incorporated in glasses with smaller salt contents. Also, the deviation of particle shapes from the spherical model will decrease as the particle dissolves.
3.5.2. ASTM C1308 experiments with ER(SF) salt glasses
Because the test solution was replaced with demineralized water in the ASTM C1308 test method, evolution of the solution composition occurred independently during each test interval with no memory of previous intervals, whereas changes in the specimen surface continued to evolve throughout the test. This allows for surface dissolution and leaching diffusion processes to be distinguished. For a pure diffusion-controlled process, the released mass will decrease in each interval due to the increasing diffusion distance from the specimen surface. The releases will show a square-root-of-time (t1/2) dependence if diffusion coefficients remain constant with depth/surface composition. For a pure dissolution process, the same mass of soluble constituents will be released during each interval. Furthermore, the dissolution rate may decrease during the test interval because of solution feedback effects due to saturation because only the average rate over the test interval can be measured. The diffusion-controlled releases will generally be affected less by solution feedback. Tests were conducted at different S/V ratios to indicate the importance of solution feedback effects on the dissolution rates of these glasses. For dissolution-controlled responses, tests at higher S/V ratios will have lower average rates than tests at lower S/V ratios, but the rates will be constant in both.
For the ASTM C1308 tests, Fig. 15 shows the NLTe and NLPb values for the baseline 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass made without any salt remained constant throughout the testing duration, although the release of Pb was slightly substoichiometric relative to Te. The linearities of both indicate the glass matrix dissolved by surface dissolution with no mass transport effects.
Fig. 15. NLi,c values over time for C1308 experiments (2 m−1) on 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass without any salt added. For both sets of data, trendlines are included [fit through (0,0)].
The NLi,c values for the glasses made with various ER(SF) loadings run at S/V ratios of 2 m−1 can be found in Fig. 16 for all salt loadings. The releases of constituents from the glasses containing 5–15 mass% ER(SF) salt loadings at S/V ratios of 2 m−1 were also linear and non-stoichiometric (the slightly decreasing slopes, or curvature, on semi-log plots indicate linear release kinetics). The NLi,c values in tests conducted at 120 m−1 were about an order of magnitude lower than those for tests conducted at 2 m−1 and increased linearly. This indicates the higher solution concentrations generated in tests conducted at 120 m−1 during each test interval attenuated the releases of all constituents relative to the tests conducted at 2 m−1, but the releases were still controlled by dissolution with no significant diffusive effects. The releases of Te and Pb indicate the dissolution behavior of the glass matrix. In all tests, NLCl,c, NLK,c, and NLCs,c were higher than NLTe,c and NLPb,c, and NLNd,c, NLY,c, and NLLa,c were lower than NLTe,c and NLPb,c. The fact that Cs and Sr were released faster than the glass matrix dissolved indicates they were not completely incorporated into the glass. With the exception of the 5%ER(SF) glass, NLLi,c values were all high and near NLCl,c, NLK,c, and NLCs,c values.
Fig. 16. Summary of NLi,c values from C1308 experiments for the glasses containing ER(SF) salt at different loadings. All tests were run at S/V ratio of 2 m−1 and the exchange interval was 1 day. Note that these are semi-log plots.
Fig. 17 shows NLTe,c, NLPb,c, NLCl,c, and NLCs,c for glasses made with different salt loadings. Whereas NLTe,c, NLPb,c, and NLCs,c increase nearly linearly through the 11-day test period, NLCl,c increases nonlinearly until ≥6 days into the test, at which point the data level off. In addition to the data for the 1-day exchange intervals through 11 days shown in Fig. 17a–c, Fig. 17d includes the results of two 7-day exchanges. These show linear increases for all glasses, but at rates that are much lower than those for the 1-day intervals. The lower slopes indicate greater solution feedback during the longer reaction interval, and the linearity indicates the absence of diffusion limits. It is likely the off-sets seen in the initial 1-day exchange intervals for glasses with high salt loading results from dissolution of salt inclusions at the surface.
Fig. 17. Summary of (a) NLTe,c, (b) NLPb,c, (c) NLCl,c, and (d) NLCs,c, for C1308 experiments run at 2 m−1 on glasses with different loadings of ER(SF) salt. Note that the timescale is different for (d) and includes data at 14-day exchange intervals in addition to the 1-day interval data.
For Fig. 17d, the release behaviors for glasses made with 5% are linear, but the values for the glass made with >10% ER(SF) are off-set by ∼ 17 g m−2. The initial releases from glasses made with higher salt loadings are offset by a similar amount, but show negative curvature that indicates some diffusional character.
An additional series of C1308 tests was conducted to provide specimens reacted for short durations for surface analyses. A small piece of the glass made with 10% ER(SF) salt was used in the test run for 1 day and small pieces of the 12.5%ER(SF) glass were used in tests run for 2, 4, and 7 days. The test solutions were not analyzed. The reacted specimens were mounted in resin, cross-sectioned, polished, and analyzed with SEM-EDS to look for compositional gradients. The SEM micrographs and EDS line-scans collected on corroded coupons are presented in Fig. 18. These maps show that the concentrations of Te, Pb, and Cl near the surface of the 10%ER(SF) specimen remained constant right up to the surface (Fig. 18a), while the surface regions of the 12.5%ER(SF) specimens were depleted of Cl to depths of nearly 4 μm within two days (Fig. 18b) and over 7 μm within 7 days (Fig. 18d). Measured corrosion layer depths (dp) for the same coupons are shown as function of test duration in Fig. 19, and while a uniform alteration layer is visible along the surface of the coupons, no surface cracks were observed as seen in the OR salt glasses (Fig. 13). Note that the increasing Pb content approaching the edge of the alteration layer is due to solubility limits in test solutions, but the Te content remains constant; this is consistent with the nonstoichiometry observed in Fig. 15. The surface analyses are consistent with the solution results for Cl in Fig. 16, Fig. 17 as well the Cl behavior seen in analyses of corroded OR glasses shown in Fig. 13.
Fig. 18. (a–d) BSE-SEM micrographs and (e–h) EDS linescans with distances (μm) from the edges of specimens (left side) subjected to C1308 experiments including (a,e) 10%ER(SF) (10C) for 1 day, (b,f) 12.5%ER(SF) (12C) for 2 days, (c,g) 12.5%ER(SF) (12E1) for 4 days, and 12.5%ER(SF) (12E2) for 7 days.
Fig. 19. Penetration depth (dp) of corrosion with time for 12.5%ER(SF) coupons after C1308 experiments for 2 days (12C), 3 days (12D), 4 days (12E1), and 7 days (12E2). Values were measured from BSE-SEM micrographs taken of cross-sectioned and polished coupons following the tests. Note that the figure does not include data at t < 2 d because these coupons were not analyzed.
3.6. Pyrochemical waste form comparison
A few different waste form options exist for metal chloride waste streams generated from pyroprocessing of UNF, some of which were discussed previously. Each waste form option differs in fabrication cost, processing complexity, salt capacity, storage volume (i.e., Vs, waste form volume to immobilize a given mass of waste), energy requirements for fabrication, atmospheric requirements for fabrication (e.g., anoxic, reducing), etc. For mineral waste form options, sodalite [Na8(AlSiO4)6Cl2] and quadridavyne [(Na,K)6Ca2(AlSiO4)6Cl4] are two that can incorporate large amounts of both alkalis and halides (Table 4) [37], but require a glass binder to immobilize the other constituents in the salt (i.e., 2+, and 3 + cations as well as some of the alkali) that cannot be accommodated into the mineral crystal structures. As far as glass waste form options, the tellurite glasses discussed for the current work show potential for immobilizing the full range of components in the salt, but they require improvements in chemical durability and full salt incorporation into the glass structure.
Table 4. Compilation and comparison of naturally-occurring minerals containing Cl (with and without alkali) as well as sodalite and tellurite glass waste forms including halide and alkali loadings, bulk densities (pb), and storage volumes (Vs) for 1 kg of immobilized salt waste. This table does not include waste form options where the salt is partitioned prior to immobilization.
A comparison between the glass-bonded sodalite [22] and tellurite glasses for immobilizing ER(SF) salt reveals that the volume requirements to immobilize a similar mass of salt are 2–3 times higher with glass-bonded sodalite (Table 4). Added benefits for tellurite glass over glass-bonded sodalite include compositional flexibility and waste form production is a one-step melting process. However, the cost of making tellurite glass is higher than making glass-bonded sodalite due to the cost of TeO2, a raw product used in glass production, and according to the current study, some of the salts do not seem to incorporate into the glass network fully based on observed phase separation and chemical durability experiments.
4. Conclusions
Tellurite glasses were fabricated with three different salts including SrCl2 and surrogates for LiCl-Li2O oxide reduction waste salt called the OR salt and a LiCl-KCl eutectic waste salt called the ER(SF) salt. The loading capacities of these salts in the 78%TeO2-22%PbO matrix are relatively high. For the SrCl2, no crystallization was observed but a color change was observed at ≥ 25 mass% loading. For glasses made with the OR salt, phase separation was observed at ≥ 25 mass% but glasses at ≥ 18 mass% were increasingly hygroscopic and appeared hydrated on the surface after a few weeks in ambient conditions. For glasses made with the ER(SF) salt, phase separation was observed at waste loadings above 13.5 mass%.
Additions of SrCl2, OR, and ER(SF) salts to the 78%TeO2-22%PbO baseline glass all resulted in decreases in the bulk densities, with SrCl2 having the smallest effect and OR salt having the largest effect. Regarding the glass transition temperature, the addition of SrCl2 resulted in an increase while the addition of OR and ER(SF) salts resulted in decreases, with the OR salt having more of an effect on Tg than the ER(SF) salt at the same loading.
Chemical durability experiments were conducted including ASTM C1285 tests on the OR salt glasses, ASTM C1308 tests on the ER(SF) glasses, and both tests on the baseline 78%TeO2-22%PbO glass without any salt. While the results from the C1285 tests tend to show incongruent dissolution of the Te and Pb, the C1308 tests showed congruent dissolution for Te and Pb and these differences are inherent between the tests where the C1308 tests reduce the impact of solution feedback and solubility limits of the glass constituents in the test solution. For the C1308 tests, the highest NLi,c values were for Cl, K, Li, Cs, and Sr; lowest for Nd, Y, and La; and Pb and Te were in between. For the C1285 tests, the highest NLi values were for Cl, Li, and Cs; Te values were intermediate; and the lowest were Pb and Sr. For the C1308 tests, the range of NLi,c values for a given glass varied significantly providing evidence that the salt did not fully incorporate into the glass during fabrication.
In summary, based on their bulk amorphous nature, the tellurite glasses show a wide range of flexibility when it comes to incorporating a variety of different halide salts with very high loading capacities. However, chemical durability results show that these salts are not fully incorporated into the glass network. The primary drawbacks to these glasses are that they are expensive to make and the salt is not completely incorporated into the glass structure.
Acknowledgements
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) is operated by Battelle Memorial Institute for the DOE under contract DE-AC05-76RL01830. This work was supported by the DOE Office of Nuclear Energy (DOE-NE). Authors would like to express thanks to the staff and leadership that funded and provided oversight to this work that include Kimberly Gray at DOE-NE, John Vienna at PNNL as well as Terry Todd, Ken Bateman, Ken Marsden, and Mike Goff at INL. The image of the lead tellurite crystal was collected by Bennett Rieck.
