<title>Screening of electrode materials and cell concepts for composite ceria + salt electrolytes</title>
<author>Atul P. Jamale; Fernando M.B. Marques</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Materials and Ceramic Engineering, CICECO University of Aveiro 3810‐193 Aveiro Portugal</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.4236</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/er.4236?saml_referrer</URL>
Summary
The optimization of the performance of electrodes (oxide-based) for composite electrolytes (Ce0.9Gd0.1O1.95 + (Li0.52Na0.48)2CO3) is addressed in this work acting mostly on the electrode chemical nature (eg, LaCoO3, Li0.43NiO2, or LiNiO2), thickness (single and multiple screen-printed layers), and cell layer concept (with/without barrier layers between electrode and electrolyte). The cell performance and stability were analyzed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, and energy dispersive spectroscopy. LaCoO3 electrodes deposited on the electrolyte using an intermediate barrier layer showed a promising area specific resistance of 0.22 Ω.cm2 at 600°C. This optimized cell processing route was adopted as reference to study the endurance performance of distinct electrode materials up to 100 hours in air, at 550°C, where lithiated NiO showed the best stability.
1 INTRODUCTION
Solid oxide and molten carbonate fuel cells (SOFCs and MCFCs) are efficient solutions being considered for the electrochemical conversion of multiple fuels into electrical power.1 Yet, problems like poor ionic conduction in ceramic electrolytes and electrode corrosion in molten carbonates prevent their wide commercialization. For intermediate temperature operation, composites based on ceramic electrolytes (mostly ceria-based) and mixtures of alkaline carbonates might replace conventional electrolytes used in SOFCs and MCFCs.2
This type of composite electrolyte involves an oxide-ion conducting ceramic (as in standard SOFCs) but acting here mostly as matrix for molten alkaline carbonates. The latter, standard electrolytes in MCFCs, are often described as carbonate-ion conductors. Accordingly, one key difference between these new composite electrolytes and those used in MCFCs is the nature of the ceramic matrix. LiAlO2, the usual MCFC matrix, is an insulating ceramic.3
At target fuel cell working temperatures (around 600°C or even lower), the molten salt and the composite conductivities (> 0.1 Scm−1 above 500°C) exceed by far the conductivity of the ceramic phase.3, 4 As a consequence, the dominant ionic transport is mostly via molten carbonates, and the entire system deviates from a typical SOFC.
Alkaline carbonates also combine chemically with a wide range of oxides at moderate temperatures, being a source of problems in the selection of compatible ceramic materials for complementary fuel cell functions.5, 6 Since the composite electrolyte-based cells are somewhat analogous to MCFCs, the usual cathode degradation problems faced with these systems must be properly assessed and prevented.
In MCFCs, typical NiO cathode particles migrate through the molten electrolyte under an oxygen activity gradient and precipitate elsewhere as Ni, with internal cell short circuiting.7 Amphoteric electrode metal oxides easily dissolve in acidic or basic environments. Strategies to circumvent the poor stability of metal oxide electrodes involve control of the melt oxobasicity with admixtures (eg, rare earth or alkaline carbonates/oxides), but also formation of solid solutions based on conventional NiO with other metals.8-28 The state-of-the art solutions show some efficacy, but alternative materials with high conductivity and chemically stable are still needed.
While small particles (as used in porous fuel cell electrode materials) provide large surface areas for reaction, materials with basic nature (namely involving alkaline-earth metals) show strong interaction with atmospheric CO2 (carbonation) becoming inactivate electrode materials.29, 30 Thus, materials with tuned particle size and chemical characteristics are needed for improved electrocatalytic behavior.
Since composite electrolytes are in between the corresponding solid oxide and molten carbonate fuel cell counterparts, possible electrodes used in these systems are obvious candidates. A brief survey of already tested cathodes in ceramic-carbonate cells, including noble metals, mixed ionic electronic conducting (MIEC) perovskites, lithiated nickel oxide and mixed metal oxides, are all shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Short overview on cathodes for ceramic-carbonate electrolyte-based fuel cells
Cathode	Processing	Temp., °C	Pmax, mW/cm2	ASR/T, Ω.cm2/°C	Ref.
Cathode	Cell
LaNi0.4Fe0.6O3	CPd	CPres	450	227	-	15
Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.2Fe0.8O3	SGelb	CPres	500	860	-	16
Ce0.8Sm0.2Fe0.9Ir0.03Co0.07O3	SGel	CPres	500	400	0.25/500	17
Ag	-	-	540	117	-	18
La0.8Sr0.2MnO3	SSRa	CPrese	540	172	-
La0.6Sr0.4CoO3	540	303	-
La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3	540	238	-
Ba0.3Ca0.7Co0.8Fe0.2O3	SGel	CPres	550	325	-	19
SrFe0.7Mn0.2Mo0.2O3	Combc	CPres	550	160	2.69/550	20
La2Ni0.8Cu0.2O4 + δ	CP	CPres	550	312	-	21
LiNiCuZnO	SSR	CPres	550	730	0.21/550
22
23
Sm0.5Sr0.5Fe0.8Cu0.2O3	Comb	CPres	600	370	1.07/525	24
La2Ni0.8Fe0.2O4 + δ	Comb	CPres	600	697	-	25
Pr2NiO4	CP	CPres	600	652	2.10/600	26
LiNiO2	SSR	CPres	650	1704	0.10/550	2, 27, 28
a SSR—solid state route.
b SGel—sol gel.
c Comb—combustion.
d CP—co-precipitation.
e CPres—co-pressing.
Within a significant list of tested electrode materials,2, 15-28 the best area specific resistance (ASR) values are in the order of 0.1 Ω.cm2 at 550°C, using a standard LiNiO2 cathode. A few complex chemical compositions show ASR values about twice to three times higher in the 500°C to 550°C range. However, few endurance tests are reported, with the longest testing times in the order of 100 hours. In short, there is no simple solution for the multiple electrode requirements, and endurance is scarcely studied. The range of promising candidates is clearly small. Tuned electrode deposition processes including layered microstructures might help with respect to stability. This will be one of the directions hereby attempted.
Symmetric cells a few millimeters thick, prepared using a single step route (co-pressing and co-firing of the composite electrolyte layer between two electrode layers, at temperatures below 700°C) showed the potential of some perovskites as cathodes.31 However, the low sintering temperature imposed by the eutectic salt mixture prevents proper ceramic bonding, yielding a fragile structure. Cells based on molten carbonates impregnated within previously sintered Ce0.9Gd0.1O1.95 (CGO) backbones using two-step routes show better mechanical stiffness and still fast ion transport. Here, the ceramic skeleton is often sintered at high temperatures with a sacrificial phase as pore former, before impregnation with the molten salt above the eutectic temperature. The advantages of two-step composite electrolyte processing routes are often cited,32, 33 but scarce information is available on electrode performance. The present work details several attempts to optimize and assess screen-printed electrodes with different thicknesses, deposited on two-step composite electrolytes.
2 EXPERIMENTAL
The starting chemicals used in this work were commercial LaCoO3 (LC, 99.9%, Praxair), CGO (99%, Praxair), Li2CO3 and Na2CO3 (99%, Sigma-Aldrich), NiO (Ni 78.5%, Alfa Aesar), and LiOH (98%, Sigma-Aldrich). NLC, the eutectic mixture of Li2CO3 and Na2CO3, was prepared from adequate dosage of these carbonates.
LC, nominal LiNiO2 (LN55) and Li0.43NiO2 (LN37), and NiO + CGO-NLC (50:50 vol%, N5G5) were deposited on composite electrolytes and tested as electrodes. The acronyms LN55 and LN37 indicate the Li and Ni atomic proportions (50%-50% or 30%-70%, respectively). To obtain LN55 and LN37, the corresponding precursors (NiO and LiOH) were mixed in ethanol in the required molar ratios, using a planetary ball mill. These mixtures were oven dried, fired at 850°C for 8 hours under controlled heating and cooling rates of 3°C min−1. These conditions ensured proper solid-state reaction. N5G5 was processed by mixing NiO and CGO-NLC in 50:50 vol%, with CGO-NLC consisting of a 70:30 vol% mixture of CGO and NLC, prepared as previously detailed.34 Agglomerates formed during heat treatment were pulverized (high energy milling, 650 rpm for 30 minutes) to obtain fine powders for electrode processing.
Composite electrolytes (about 1-1.5 mm thick) were fabricated by infiltration (at 800°C) of pre-sintered CGO substrates (with about 40 vol% porosity) with molten NLC. Uniaxial and isostatic pressing were used to shape the CGO ceramic backbones as disks before sintering. The electrolyte skeleton processing route involved mixing (by ball milling) of a cobalt-based admixture (Co (NO3)2.6H2O) with standard CGO powder, before sintering at temperatures in the order of 1000°C. The porosity of CGO backbones was estimated from actual density (determined from the mass and volume of each disk) and theoretical density of CGO.
Pore percolation within CGO substrates provides open channels extending to the surface. These are easily filled by molten phases due to capillary forces, offering sensitive pathways for mass transport above the NLC eutectic temperature (around 500°C). To prevent/slow down this process, different effects were exploited, namely the variation of electrode thickness and implementation of a CGO barrier layer between electrolyte and electrode. This barrier layer included only a light NLC content to facilitate low temperature bonding (fired at 700°C for 30 minutes). Barrier and electrode layers were deposited by manual screen printing. A slurry formed after drop wise addition of binder (4 wt% ethyl cellulose in α-terpinol) was forced through the 140 mesh screen openings yielding a uniform porous film after binder removal.35
LC layers were used as reference to tune the entire deposition procedure. Screen-printed LC electrodes deposited on two-step electrolytes were used to identify ideal deposition conditions. Low thickness LC electrodes (LC-thin, around 20 μm thick) were deposited on the electrolytes and annealed at 525°C for 30 minutes. LC-thick films (around 50 μm thick) were deposited on two-step electrolytes without or with an intermediate barrier layer, followed by treatment at 525°C for 30 minutes. These cells are hereby named LC-thick (no barrier) and LC-S (S from single barrier layer). Figure 1 includes schemes of cells tested in this work.
Figure 1
Schemes of (sliced half) cells used in this work: 1—symmetric cell with directly deposited electrodes; 2—symmetric cell with a barrier layer in between electrolyte and electrodes; a, electrode; b, composite electrolyte (1-1.5 mm thick); c, barrier layer. The typical thickness of deposited layers is listed in Table 2
Since the deposition of a single barrier layer was not enough to prevent electrode degradation, this layer was removed by light polishing with fine grain SiC abrasive paper (800 grit) before deposition of a second barrier layer. After this second deposition of a barrier layer, the relative stability of LC electrodes increased significantly. Accordingly, this procedure was adopted to test the remaining electrode materials (LN55, LN37, and N5G5). In the case of LC electrodes, these cells are hereby named LC-D (D from double layer) to distinguish them from the previous (LC-S).
In all cases curled current carrying Au-wires provided the required contact with the electrode layers. However, Ag-paste was also used to improve current collection, after proper assessment of the impact of this solution on the overall cell performance. This procedure was adopted only with a final set of electrode materials (LC-D, LN55, LN37, and N5G5) used in endurance tests (100 hours at 550°C). Considering the large number of experiments under assessment, a short survey of main characteristics, materials, and acronyms is listed in Table 2.
Table 2. Electrode materials, cell acronyms, concepts, dimensions, and testing conditions (electrolyte: CGO-NLC; electrode deposition: screen-printing)
Electrode/thickness, μm	Acronym	Barrier Layer/Thickness, μm	Current Collector
LaCoO3	~20	LC-thin	No	-	Au wire
LaCoO3	~50	LC-thick	No	-	Au wire
LaCoO3	~40	LC-S	1 layer	~7	Au wire
LaCoO3	~100	LC-D	1 + 1 layer	~7	(Ag paste) + Au wire
Li0.43NiO2	~100	LN37-D	1 + 1 layer	~7	(Ag paste) + Au wire
LiNiO2	~100	LN55-D	1 + 1 layer	~7	(Ag paste) + Au wire
NiO/CGO-NLC	~100	N5G5-D	1 + 1 layer	~7	(Ag paste) + Au wire
The performance of all electrodes was firstly monitored using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (HP 4284A LCR Meter). Cells were analyzed in ambient air, within the 500°C to 650°C working temperature range (frequency from 20 Hz to 1 MHz, 0.5 V signal magnitude), after previous screening of testing conditions.31 This method is quite effective to separate processes in electrochemical systems, namely in electrode kinetics. Ideally, each process has a specific time constant (Tp) related to the inherent resistive (R) and capacitive (C) process characteristics, resonating at particular frequencies (fr, with Tp = RC = 1/fr).
Often, non-ideal performance can be accounted with the introduction of the so-called constant phase element (Q) corresponding to deviation from pure capacitive behavior. Most impedance data can be properly handled by combining R, RC, or RQ (parallel) circuit elements arranged in series. Computation of R and C or Q-values allows the identification of frequency ranges and likely rate determining processes. In this work, impedance data were analyzed with the assistance of Z-view software (Scribner Associates Inc). Details on typical fitting solutions and limitations can be found elsewhere.31
To inspect likely crossover elemental diffusion within the cells, chemical and microstructural analyses were conducted. Phase stability was assessed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) in the 20° to 80° 2θ range (Rigaku Geigerflex D/Max-C). Microstructure and compositional distributions across the electrode/electrolyte layers were inspected using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi SU-70) equipped with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, Bruker QUANTAX 400).
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Typical impedance spectra of cells with diverse LC layers, measured at 600°C, in air, normalized for the area and corrected for the lead Au-wire resistance, are shown in Figure 2A. A constant electrode surface area of 0.27 cm2 was used for ASR calculations, a key feature for direct comparison between electrodes.36 The equivalent circuit used to fit these impedance data is shown in Figure 2B, while one example of fitting results is shown in Figure 2A.
Figure 2
A, Area normalized impedance spectra of cells at 600°C, in air, for diversely screen- printed LC-electrodes; B, equivalent circuit used to fit the impedance spectra of symmetric cells. One example of circuit fitting results (solid line) is shown for the LC-thin electrode. The inset shows a detailed view of the low-frequency region. See Table 2 for cell acronyms
A high-frequency inductive branch due to the setup characteristics can be used to quickly perceive the distinct cell ohmic resistances, RO. High-frequency semicircles commonly ascribed to the oxide phase grain and grain boundaries are not detected here since molten carbonates are the fast ion conducting pathway above 500°C. A limited frequency range also prevents a deep study of electrode kinetics when low-frequency (LF) elements are present. In fact, in previous work using impedance spectroscopy to study the kinetics of electrode (lithiated NiO, LiCoO2 and LiFeO2) reactions in MCFCs, in oxygen rich atmospheres (≥10 vol%) with variable CO2 content, minor small arcs appeared occasionally in the lower frequency range (<10 Hz).37, 38 Irrespective of these limitations, the spectra observed now and in previous work showed a maximum of two discernible contributions, hereby named IF (intermediate frequency) and LF. These are usually ascribed to charge transfer and diffusion processes, respectively.37, 38
In Figure 2A, the worst electrode performances, corresponding to the larger electrode arcs, are observed for the directly screen-printed LC electrodes. These range in magnitude (IF arc, excluding the LF tail) between 2.34 and 0.67 Ω.cm2 for LC-thin and LC-thick, respectively. The total electrode impedance can only be estimated from fitting and extrapolation using the small spectra tail but follows the same trend in relative magnitude. Molten NLC migrates easily to the electrode compartment by capillary action and promotes the partial conversion of LC into La2O2(CO3) (or related lithiated compounds), as shown in previous work.5, 6 This reaction impacts the concentration of carbonate ions in the electrolyte and corresponding conductivity, besides dropping electrode performance. The likely formation of resistive phases inside the molten carbonate flooded electrode pores and the decrease in active electrode area with inherent electrode degradation are both coherent with the observed large electrode impedances in directly deposited electrode layers (LC-thin and LC-thick), and with the relative magnitudes of the impedance of these two electrodes.
To support this line of reasoning, the chemical inertness of these electrode layers was studied by XRD (after electrochemical impedance spectroscopy), and the results are shown in Figure 3. Phase identification used the following ICDD cards: LaCoO3 (04-007-8982), CGO (01-075-0161), (Li0.52Na0.48)2CO3 (00-034-1193), and La2O2CO3 (00–048-1113). The formation of the oxycarbonate phase (La2O2(CO3)) when LC-thin and LC-thick electrodes were used was confirmed in this manner. In the present experiments, the well-crystallized rare-earth oxycarbonate showed growing peak intensity when moving from LC-thin to LC-thick. Considering the relative electrode performance of these layers, this result is probably a simple consequence of the distinct amounts of reactants present in the thin and thick LC layers. The latter, even if consumed in larger amount, still kept some functionality, as suggested from impedance data.
Figure 3
XRD patterns of screen-printed LC electrodes. Also indexed some of the major peaks
The stability of La2O2(CO3) in samples exposed to high temperatures (600°C or more) might be questioned when this phase is exposed to synthetic air.5, 39 However, in these tests, La2O2(CO3) is in contact with molten carbonates and surrounded by stagnant ambient air (open end horizontal tubular furnace), atmosphere with apparently enough CO2 to preserve this phase.
The previous results clearly showed the need to tailor the electrode/electrolyte interface. This justified the new set of experiments using the barrier layers (LC-S and LC-D). Data in Figure 2A show that electrode degradation could be reduced after implementation of this solution. The central idea was to enhance the confinement of NLC within the electrolyte. The LC-S cell already suggests an improved electrode performance with respect to LC-thick but still a large ohmic resistance. Removal of this first barrier layer with repetition of the entire deposition process (LC-D) improved the overall performance.
The efficacy of this solution was also confirmed by XRD (Figure 3). Cells using barrier layers (LC-S and LC-D) showed no evidence of rare-earth oxycarbonates. While the XRD analysis was mostly sensitive to the composition of the upper electrode layer, the absence of any peak corresponding to the oxycarbonate is a good indication of the preservation of a significant portion of the electrode fully active.
Ohmic (RO), electrode (RP), and total cell resistances (Rtotal = RO+ RP) obtained from equivalent circuit parameter fittings using impedance data are listed in the first set of columns in Table 3. LC-D has the lowest impedance. Data on RP, in line with the previously discussed electrode degradation mechanism, follows the sequence LC-thin>LC-thick>LC-S > LC-D.
Table 3. Electrolyte (RO), electrode (RP), and total cell (Rtotal) resistances for cells with and without Ag-current collector. Data from equivalent circuit parameters used to fit impedance spectra obtained at 600°C
Electrode	Resistance, Ω.cm2	Electrode	Resistance, Ω.cm2
RO	RP	Rtotal	RO	RP	Rtotal
Without Ag-current collector	With Ag-current collector
LC-thin	2.83	28.37	31.20	LC-D	0.55	0.22	0.77
LC-thick	0.96	3.48	4.44	LN37-D	0.26	1.03	1.29
LC-S	4.02	0.53	4.55	LN55-D	0.62	1.66	2.28
LC-D	2.07	0.48	2.55	N5G5-D	0.95	2.27	3.22
The cross sections of distinct electrolyte/electrode layers (Figure 4) were observed to try to obtain a deeper understanding on observed trends without and with barrier layers. Low atomic weight carbonates emit fewer electrons in SEM, looking dark on a grayish background of rounded CGO and LC grains. While in the cases of LC-S and LC-D electrodes, the barrier layers seem soaked with carbonates (Figure 4A), the upper LC layers were almost free of carbonates, suggesting that the barrier provided the required NLC confinement (Figure 4B). The visible difference in the amounts of carbonates in the LC-thin and LC-thick electrode layers with respect to LC-S and LC-D is notorious (Figure 4B).
Figure 4
SEM views across the electrode/electrolyte interface: A, low magnification; B, high magnification. See Table 2 for cell acronyms. The common magnification and scale marks are in the left and right-hand side cropped images, respectively
In line with the observed reactivity of LC with NLC, elemental delocalization could be detected by EDS (maps shown in Figure 5). These photos illustrate the presence of Na inside the electrodes with some visible Co (and La) present into the electrolyte region. The apparent migration of Na to the surface suggested by these EDS maps combined with the previously mentioned absence of carbonates in the direct observation of LC-S and LC-D electrode layers (Figure 4B) seemed coherent with the electrode impedance sequence LC-thin>LC-thick>LC-S > LC-D. Any Co released from reaction between LC and the molten carbonates can be totally or partly dissolved in the molten phase or present in dispersed secondary phases, below the detection limit of XRD. On the contrary, La from LC is clearly combined as oxycarbonate (as discussed before) but might also be partly dissolved in the melt.
Figure 5
EDS maps across electrode/electrolyte interfaces in diversely treated, after impedance analysis: A, LC-thin; B, LC-thick; C, LC-S; and D, LC-D. See Table 2 for cell acronyms [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The efficacy of the barrier layer is necessarily due to specific microstructural characteristics. While these layers are fully impregnated with alkaline carbonates, as also found in the core CGO substrate, within the barrier layers, an enhanced CGO/NLC interfacial surface area per unit volume is developed (Figure 4B). A wide distribution of pore sizes and capillary forces seems to provide a stable wetting condition of CGO grains by NLC. In fact, within the barrier layer, the small CGO powder particles are loosely bonded due to their low firing temperature. On the contrary, in the core ceramic skeleton, fired at higher temperature with a sintering admixture, NLC is kept in relatively large open pores.
Graded porosity is a well-known strategy to preserve the molten carbonates inside a porous matrix even under significant pressure gradients. This is achieved using a much smaller pore size in the ceramic matrix with respect to the electrode materials, to benefit from the distinct capillary forces generated in this manner.40, 41 Following this line of reasoning, the efficacy of the sequential (double) barrier layer deposition process seems to rely on the removal of excess NLC present after impregnation of the CGO skeleton combined with preferential NLC wetting within the barrier layer due to enhanced capillary forces.
Irrespective of the obvious progress with microstructural tuning, ohmic losses were higher than expected from the properties of the electrolyte constituents (NLC and these composite electrolytes have a conductivity exceeding by far 0.1 S.cm−1 above melting3, 4). This suggested an inadequate electrode ability to draw current due to significant in plane surface resistance. To test this idea, Ag-paste was used to enlarge the active current collector surface area. These new measurements showed remarkable reduction in ohmic losses with marginal deviation in the electrode arc impedance, confirming the poor electrode in plane surface conductivity (Figure 2B and Table 3). Based on these results, similar processing routes were adopted using the remaining electrode compositions (LN37, LN55, and N5G5). Impedance data for the new cells are shown in Figure 6A. The relative magnitudes of the depressed arcs increase according to the sequence LC < LN37 < LN55 < N5G5.
Figure 6
A, Area normalized impedance spectra of cells with dual barrier layer treatment, using Ag-current collectors, in air, at 600°C; B, temperature dependence for the ASR of electrodes within the 525°C to 650°C range; electrode (C), electrolyte (D), and total (E) ASR stability during 100-h endurance tests in air, at 550°C
Area specific resistance data evaluated after fitting adequate equivalent circuit parameters to these impedance spectra were plotted against the reciprocal of the absolute temperature. These Arrhenius plots demonstrate a consistent thermal activation for all kinetic parameters with only minor deviation in slopes amongst all sets of data (Figure 6B). However, the relative performance observed with these electrodes deserves some comments.
LC is a well-established cathode material with conductivity exceeding 1000 Scm−1 at typical working temperatures.42 On the contrary, stoichiometric NiO is almost an insulator, with few electron holes determining the conduction. Li substitution in NiO enhances the conductivity of the base metal oxide while the cathode solubility is diminished.43-45 Substitutional Li+ ions tend to be compensated with an equivalent number of electron holes. This reaction can be written as:
@(1)
using standard Kroger-Vink type notation for the acceptor dopant ( urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4236:er4236-math-0002), normal lattice oxygen ions ( urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4236:er4236-math-0003), and electron holes (h●). Here, two heavily lithiated nickel oxides (nominal [ urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4236:er4236-math-0004] = 30 and 50 at%) were tested. Excess Li in the system with respect to the solubility limit in the lattice is not a problem in this case since this will increase the system oxobasicity.
Based on previous information, poor electronic conductivity and lacking anionic defects are likely to explain the ASR gap amongst the perovskite and all nickel-based systems. From data in Table 3, it can be seen that the LC-D electrode polarization resistance is five times lower than the best lithiated-NiO (LN37). The former is clearly an acceptable electrochemical performance.
The cell stability was also assessed in symmetric cell configurations, at 550°C, in air, for periods up to 100 hours (Figure 6C-E). N5G5 quickly changes after only 4 hours, showing a waiving electrode performance before reaching a final value of Rp around 3.98 Ω.cm2. Nonetheless, the rest of the systems showed stable electrode performance. In particular, LC-D preserved an Rp of only 0.48 Ω.cm2 even after 100 hours, irrespective of observed light La loss. La-dissolution could be indirectly noticed from a gradual increase in electrolyte resistance up to about 1.5 Ω.cm2. As mentioned, the formation of La2O2(CO3) is likely to originate partial blocking of ionic pathways within NLC and decreasing carrier concentration and active electrode surface area.
Inferior electrolyte stability was observed in N5G5-D cells suggesting solubility and diffusivity of NiO. Lithiation slowed down the NiO-based electrode performance decay, as suggested with the results obtained for LN37 and LN55. While the most stable electrode and electrolyte performance were observed in the LN37-D cell, the lower electrode impedance and cell resistance were found in LC-D. These promising systems ask for further attention under typical cell operating conditions.
The previous symmetric cells were also characterized with respect to chemical compatibility and microstructure. XRD data in Figure 7A show no obvious modifications except for the fingerprint of NLC in N5G5-D and LN37-D-based cells. Besides those already mentioned, the Li0.43NiO2 and LiNiO2 (00-058-0669), NiO (00-047-1049) ICDD cards were used for phase identification.
Figure 7
A, XRD patterns of electrode layers and B, SEM views across electrode/electrolyte interfaces in two-step composite electrolyte-based cells with dual barrier layer treatment, after impedance analysis. See Table 2 for cell acronyms. In (B), the common magnification and scale marks are in the left and right-hand side cropped images, respectively. Indexed some of the major XRD peaks
Scanning electron microscopy inspection across the electrode/electrolyte interfaces is hardly conclusive since we are in the presence of electrode materials with distinct chemical nature and starting particle size characteristics (Figure 7B). The electrode chemical composition will impact liquid wetting and any potential reaction with the molten carbonates, whereas distinct grain size distributions and electrode microstructures prevent a sound comparison of performance except for their relative stability.
While the most promising materials here tested are within the state-of-the-art list of cathodes for SOFCs or MCFCs, the results now obtained open the possibility of microstructural tuning as an effective solution to circumvent obvious compatibility problems. Layered electrodes and barrier layers are known in fuel cell development, but consideration of this solution in these novel composite electrolyte-based systems is here revealed for the first time as a promising route.
Lastly, several issues still need proper consideration. All tests were performed in air. The limited stability of molten carbonates in air asks for the introduction of CO2 as a crucial gas phase constituent. As mentioned in the introduction, this will change the chemical characteristics of the molten phase and might introduce new constraints with respect to electrode chemical stability. As a second major open issue, proper assessment of electrode kinetics also needs an extended frequency range (in impedance measurements) and adjusted gas phase compositions. While aware of these limitations, the present results provide the necessary basis to move deeper in these directions based on previously screened electrode materials and microstructures.
4 CONCLUSIONS
Molten carbonates present in composite electrolytes and free access to the outer ceramic matrix region are major sources of electrode degradation, enhanced when the chemical nature of the electrode is sensitive to this corrosive medium. Microstructural tuning, namely using intermediate electrolyte/electrode barrier layers, able to prevent/decrease the contact with the molten carbonates, showed promising results. A tailored microstructure provided optimized conditions with respect to the chemical stability of LaCoO3 cathodes (LC-D cell), reaching an ASR of only 0.22 Ω.cm2 at 600°C, compatible with a high-performance fuel cell. Endurance tests performed at 550°C with LN37-D and LC-D electrode layers showed the lowest overall polarization losses, pinpointing these materials as the most promising for ulterior developments.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Funding from Projects NANOMFC (New-INDIGO/0001/2013), CO2ZERO (POCI-01-0145-FEDER-016654-PTDC/CTM-CER/6732/2014), MOCO3 (M-ERA.NET2 2016-MOCO3—0009/2016), and CICECO—Aveiro Institute of Materials (Ref. FCT UID/CTM/50011/2013), financed by national funds (Portugal) through the FCT/MEC (PIDDAC) and when appropriate co-financed by FEDER under the COMPETE 2020 Program, is highly appreciated.
