<title>Fatigue Properties of SiC/SiC Composites Under Various Loading Modes</title>
<author>Nogami; Nozawa; Kawai; Guan; Hasegawa</author>
<Affiliation>Tohoku University, Department of Quantum Science and Energy Engineering , Sendai 980-8579 , Japan; National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology , Chiba-shi 263-8555 , Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1333822</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/15361055.2017.1333822</URL>
Abstract
Because fatigue resistance is one of the most important issues for the blanket structural materials of the fusion reactor, the fatigue damage formation processes of the advanced SiC/SiC composite (Tyranno SA 3rd/CVI-SiC composite with SiC/C multilayer interphase) for fusion reactor applications were investigated. The fatigue tests of the SiC/SiC composite were successfully performed up to 105 cycles with no significant technical issues by using a small specimen test technique developed under the IFMIF/EVEDA. Based on the evaluation of the modulus change during the fatigue tests, the tensile loading was clarified to be a dominant factor for the degradation of the SiC/SiC composite.
Keywords: SiC/SiC composite;fatigue;loading mode;modulus;small specimen
I. INTRODUCTION
Silicon carbide (SiC) fiber reinforced SiC matrix composite (SiC/SiC composite) is a promising candidate material for advanced fusion DEMO blanket due to the excellent thermo-mechanical properties, excellent irradiation resistance, and low induced radioactivity.1 To realize the engineering design of the DEMO and its reliable long term operation, understanding the damage formation processes in the structural material during the operation, establishing the failure scenario of the components based on these processes, and defining and assessment of their lifetime are necessary.
Since the fusion reactor structural material must support cyclic loads induced by thermal and electromagnetic stresses, the fatigue properties of the SiC/SiC composite should be clarified. However, the damage formation processes under the cyclic loadings of the SiC/SiC composite is expected to be significantly complicated and to be strongly dependent on the material itself. Therefore, this study focused on investigating the fatigue damage formation processes of the SiC/SiC composite, which is the latest advanced SiC/SiC composite for fusion reactor applications with stronger fiber/matrix interfacial bonding.2
Based on the consideration of the future fatigue testing of neutron-irradiated materials and future in-situ fatigue testing during neutron irradiation using IFMIF (International Fusion Material Irradiation Facility) etc., a small-sized specimen was used for the evaluation of this study, which was originally developed under the IFMIF/EVEDA (Engineering Verification and Engineering Activities) of the BA (Broader Approach) framework.3 Though a reversed tension-compression test condition is generally applied for the fatigue test as a standard test method, a reversed tension-tension test condition has been mostly applied for the ceramics matrix composites, especially when using a small specimen because of their relatively low resistance to the buckling. Therefore, this study tried to clarify the validity of the small specimen test technique developed under the IFMIF/EVEDA for the fatigue test of SiC/SiC composite under various loading conditions with compression loads.
II. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
Material used in this study was a SiC/SiC composite fabricated by a chemical vapor infiltration (CVI) process by Hyper-Therm High Temperature Composites, Inc. Figure 1 shows the macroscopic and microscopic appearances of this composite. The reinforced fiber of this composite was Tyranno SA 3rd. The 0°/90° plain-weave sheets of this fiber was two-dimensionally laminated in this composite. The interphase between the matrix and fiber was SiC/C multilayer (one 150 nm-C layer + four 100 nm-SiC/20 nm-C multilayers). The proportional limit stress (PLS) of this composite was around 100 MPa.
Fig. 1. (a) Macroscopic and (b) microscopic appearances of SiC/SiC composite.
Figures 2a and 2b shows the shape and photo of the fatigue specimen. The round-bar specimen with test section diameter of 1.7 mm and test section length of 3.4 mm was used. As shown in Figs. 2c and 2d, there are around five fiber bundles and a few macro pores in the cross-section of the specimen test section. The end-connection of this specimen was a modified button head shape and was fixed by testing machine jigs with mechanical pressure as shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 2. (a) Shape of fatigue specimen, (b) photo of fatigue specimen, (c) macroscopic appearance of test section of fatigue specimen, and (d) cross-sectional image of test section of fatigue specimen.
Fig. 3. Schematic illustration of specimen fixture and photo of extensometer of fatigue test.
In general, fatigue under relatively large applied stress and strain up to 104–105 cycles is recognized as a low cycle fatigue. Because the fatigue induced by thermal and electromagnetic stresses in fusion reactor would be the low cycle fatigue, fatigue tests up to about 105 cycles in the maximum were conducted in this study. All the fatigue tests were carried out at room temperature in air under axial strain control using an electromotive testing machine with a 1 kN load cell fabricated by Kobe Material Testing Laboratory, Japan. A completely reversed tension-compression, tension-tension, and compression-compression loading conditions were applied and the total strain range was controlled using a triangular wave with an axial strain rate of 0.01%/s. As shown in Fig. 3, the axial strain was measured using a strain-gauge-based extensometer with gauge length of 2 mm, which was attached directly to the specimen. The total strain range was 0.06% and 0.12%. After the fatigue test, cracks at the specimen surface were observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM).
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The fatigue tests of SiC/SiC composite under all the test conditions were successfully performed up to 105 cycles with no significant technical issues. Relatively smooth hysteresis curves were obtained throughout the fatigue tests though small noise and drift of the stress and strain signals were observed as a minor technical issue, which might be due to a slight temperature change etc. However, it could be concluded that the fatigue test method using the small round-bar specimen and the testing machine developed under the IFMIF/EVEDA was suitable for the fatigue test of the SiC/SiC composite under various loading conditions with compression loads.
Figure 4 shows the stress-strain curves of (a) tension-compression, (b) tension-tension, and (c) compression-compression loading conditions of the fatigue tests at total strain range of 0.12%. The fatigue tests were continued to 104–105 cycles and no visible macroscopic cracks and fracture of the specimens were observed after that. As shown in Fig. 4b, the peak tensile stress exceeded the PLS at the first cycle in the tension-tension fatigue test. The pseudo ductility of the composite material was observed at the first cycle. After the first cycle, the pseudo ductility disappeared and the elastic deformation was maintained up to the last cycle of the fatigue test. On the other hand, in case of the tension-compression and the compression-compression fatigue tests at total strain range of 0.12% shown in Figs. 4a and 4c and the fatigue tests at total strain range of 0.06% under all the loading conditions, no pseudo ductility was observed from the first cycle to the last cycle of the fatigue test. Thus, the peak stress did not exceed the PLS under these test conditions.
Fig. 4. Stress-strain curves of (a) tension-compression, (b) tension-tension, and (c) compression-compression loading conditions of fatigue test at total strain range of 0.12%.
The Young’s modulus change has been applied in previous researches to evaluate the mechanical degradation of the composite materials during cyclic fatigue.4–7 Therefore, the change in the normalized Young’s modulus was evaluated in this study to investigate the damage formation, accumulation, and evolution processes during the fatigue tests, which was the modulus in each cycle divided by that in the first cycle (E/E0). The Young’s modulus was the slope of the linear region of the stress-strain curves. Figure 5 shows the change in normalized Young’s modulus at total strain range of 0.06% and 0.12% under tension-compression, tension-tension, and compression-compression loading conditions. In case of the compression-compression loading conditions, no change of the modulus was observed up to 105 cycles regardless of the total strain range. On the other hand, the fatigue tests under the tension-compression and the tension-tension loading conditions showed a reduction of the modulus regardless of the total strain range. Figure 6 shows the relation between the normalized Young’s modulus at 104 cycles and the maximum peak stress of the stress-strain curve of all the test conditions of this study. The reduction ratio of the modulus increased with the maximum peak stress. Especially, the reduction became significant when the maximum peak stress exceeded the PLS of the composite. Thus, the tension loading could be a dominant factor for the degradation of the SiC/SiC composite used in this study.
Fig. 5. Change in normalized Young’s modulus during fatigue test at total strain range of 0.06 and 0.12% under tension-compression, tension-tension, and compression-compression loading conditions.
Fig. 6. Relation between normalized Young’s modulus at 104 cycles and maximum peak stress.
Similar reduction of the normalized Young’s modulus with the maximum peak stress was observed in the previous researches.4–6 The fatigue tests in those previous researches were carried out at 1200–1300°C in air using CVI-processed SiC/SiC composites with the Nicalon and Hi-Nicalon fibers and the C monolayer as an interphase between the matrix and fiber. The matrix of the composite used by Ruggles-Wrenn et al. consisted of layers of SiC and B4C (Refs. 5 and 6), whereas that used by Zhu et al. was the SiC single phase,4 which was the same as that in this study. Decrease behavior with number of cycles in most of those previous researches was clearly different from this study. The continuous monotonic decrease was observed in most of those previous researches,4–6 whereas, in this study, the modulus exhibited an initially rapid decrease and a slight decrease after that, especially under the tension-tension loading condition at the total strain range of 0.12%, which showed the largest maximum peak stress. However, similar to this study, the composite by Zhu et al. showed the initially rapid decrease of the modulus under the large applied tensile stress compared with the PLS, whereas no rapid decrease was observed when the applied stress was not so large.4 According to the previous report, the initial decrease in modulus was considered to be due to the increase in matrix crack density.7 Based on the results in this study and those previous researches, relatively large applied stress could induce the initial decrease in modulus due to the increase in matrix crack density in the composite with the SiC single phase matrix, whereas the composite with the multilayer matrix could have relatively high resistance to the matrix cracking. The continuous monotonic decrease in modulus in those previous researches could be affected by the degradation of the C monolayer interphase by the oxidation under the high temperature and in-air test environment. No effect of the test environment was expected in the room temperature fatigue test in this study. Moreover, the SiC/C multilayer interphase of the composite used in this study could have relatively high resistance to the crack propagation in comparison with the C monolayer one. Consequently, the slight decrease after the initially rapid decrease in modulus was considered to occur in the fatigue test of this study. As shown in Fig. 7, not only matrix cracks but cracks across fibers and cracks at the inside of the fiber bundles were observed after the tension-tension fatigue test at total strain range of 0.12%. Therefore, it could be assumed that the matrix cracks were initially formed with relatively high number density and the other types of cracks gradually initiated with relatively low number density after that. No significant growth of the cracks might occur due to the blocking by fiber bundles, SiC/C multilayer interphases, and pores.
Fig. 7. Typical crack images of surface of specimen test section after tension-tension fatigue test at total strain range of 0.12% [(a) and (b) crack across fibers, (c) crack at inside of fiber bundle, and (d) crack across matrix; observation area and direction are shown in upper photos.].
IV. CONCLUSION
To investigate the fatigue damage formation processes of the latest advanced SiC/SiC composite for fusion reactor applications and to clarify the validity of the small specimen test technique developed under the IFMIF/EVEDA for the fatigue test of SiC/SiC composite, fatigue tests of Tyranno SA 3rd/CVI-SiC composite with SiC/C multilayer interphase was carried out at room temperature under the tension-compression, tension-tension, and compression-compression loading conditions. The results of this study are summarized below.
The fatigue tests of SiC/SiC composite were successfully performed up to 105 cycles with no significant technical issues under all the test conditions by using a small specimen test technique developed under the IFMIF/EVEDA.
In case of the compression-compression loading modes, no change of the normalized Young’s modulus was observed. On the other hand, the fatigue tests under the tension-compression and the tension-tension loading conditions showed the reduction of the modulus.
The reduction ratio of the normalized Young’s modulus increased with the maximum peak stress. Therefore, the tension loading could be a dominant factor for the degradation of the SiC/SiC composite used in this study.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the IFERC (International Fusion Energy Research Center) projects of the BA framework. Authors are grateful to Chiaki Hisaka, Masaharu Fujiwara, and Taejoon Kim of Kobe Material Testing Laboratory for their help with the fatigue tests.
