<title>Uranium Carbide Properties for Advanced Fuel Modeling – A Review</title>
<author>Vasudevamurthy Gokul; Nelson Andrew T.</author>
<Affiliation>Fuel Development Section, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 1 Bethel Valley Rd, Oak Ridge, TN 37830, United States</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2021.153145</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311521003688?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
This article compiles and presents historic properties data on uranium carbides (UxCy).
The data were collected through a literature survey and are presented here to the nuclear fuel community.
The intention of the authors is to (1) help fuel modelers who can use this as a compendium and (2) make the community aware of the wide gap in properties data of this important class of compounds to rejuvenate research to help bridge these gaps.
Abstract
Uranium carbides are receiving renewed interest as a preferred nuclear fuel composition for advanced reactors due to their numerous favorable properties. Like many other refractory and transition metal carbides these compounds exist in both hypo- and hyper-stoichiometric compositions which results in significant variations in physical, thermal, and mechanical properties. This manuscript surveys both historic and recent literature to compile important properties data mainly as a function of temperature and carbon content to support fuel performance modeling. Expressions and fits for such properties are also suggested when allowed by complete data sets. The manuscript also attempts to highlight gaps and discrepancies in the reported data to assist the nuclear fuels community identify key areas that may require further attention in terms of future research and development.
1. Introduction and historical perspective
Uranium carbides (UxCy hereafter; note that use of this chemical formula does not specify stoichiometry where such information is not available in the referenced literature) such as monocarbide (UC1.0), dicarbide (UC2), and sesquicarbide (U2C3) have historically been fuel compositions of interest to the high-temperature nuclear reactor community. This fuel composition was first widely assessed in early nuclear rocket programs such as the ROVER NERVA's KIWI II design which used UxCy kernels dispersed in a zirconium matrix [1]. Additionally, UxCy were considered in non-aqueous reactors, such as the organic cooled reactor [2]. Efforts in the 1970s and 1980s centered on breeding and the transmutation of waste often included UxCy as a fuel option due to their high heavy metal densities and lower moderating atom concentrations relative to the more common uranium dioxide (UO2) [3,4]. Similar drivers also dictated UxCy as a fuel of choice in some of the Gen IV gas-cooled reactors, especially those that intended to operate in the fast spectrum, such as the gas-cooled fast reactor [5].
UxCy also offer a greater compatibility with carbon based high-temperature matrix materials (example: Silicon Carbide (SiC), Graphite and Zirconium Carbide(ZrC)) compared to oxide fuels and can also retain certain fission product and minor actinide species in more thermodynamically stable carbide phases than those that would form in oxide fuels [6]. The formation of these stable phases in a carbide-based fuel could result in improved chemical sequestration efficacy of some volatile and highly diffusive species. UC1.0 is the most common UxCy fuel composition due to its superior uranium density, but UC2 could be favored in applications with very high carbon activity to limit the potential for further carburization [3]. Most notably, UC1.0 offers a higher uranium density compared to UO2 (12.9 vs. 9.7 g/cm3) and significantly higher thermal conductivity (22 vs. 3 W/m-K at 1200 K in the unirradiated state). Compared to UO2, UC1.0 offers a lower fuel-to-moderating-atom ratio with a single carbon atom present, and a follow-on advantage of a shorter doubling time for breeders making it more attractive in fast reactors. As described later in this manuscript, UC1.0 is also reported to undergo less creep than UO2 under low-temperature, high-dose neutron irradiations attributed to its favorable electronic structure.
Despite these favorable properties, UxCy suffer from several disadvantages compared with the reference ceramic nuclear fuel form, UO2. Fundamental processing issues such as oxygen contamination, carbon content regulation (stoichiometry control), and challenges in translating laboratory-scale fabrication methods to large-scale production limit broader commercial interest in this fuel composition. The ability of uranium mononitride (UN) to provide even greater advantages (example: higher thermal conductivity, higher oxidation stability and more stoichiometric control) at the cost of similar challenges has generally driven its selection for contemporary reactor concepts that use nontraditional ceramic fuels. The relatively dilute irradiation performance databases of both systems, particularly for high-temperature and high-burnup applications, coupled with the thermodynamic advantages provided by them suggest that interest in both UxCy and UN will likely remain or even grow in the coming years [7,8].
In the past, reviews of the properties of UxCy have been produced based on historic data [6,9], but the resulting monographs are no longer in print and thus are not available as general community references. The experimental measurements and analyses referenced by historic reviews also are inherently limited to the capabilities of the era. Recent property measurements made of uranium - silicon compounds that have been in use since the early years of the nuclear era demonstrate the clarity that modern synthesis, characterization, and measurement methods can bring to the development of fuel properties for systems that are highly sensitive and susceptible to impurities [10,11]. Similar momentum is expected gather in context of UxCy with renewed interests in microreactors for space exploration justifying a renewed effort in compiling latest data and providing an updated reference to the community.
This article provides a compendium that summarizes the existing property database to help reactor designers and fuel performance modelers evaluate uranium-carbon fuel forms while highlighting the existing wide knowledge gaps. Although the properties of the UC1.0 are relatively more abundant than UC2 and U2C3, the current authors have attempted to include the properties of these non-stoichiometric denominations stoichiometry, wherever relevant data is available. Additionally, the data compiled and presented in this in this manuscript is intended to serve as a common baseline for future investigations that aim to elucidate more specific correlations between, impurity elements, and ternary phases on critical fuel performance properties.
2. Melting point, density, phase diagram and crystal structure
Literature suggests that the melting point of UC1.0 ~2700 ± 25 K and UC2 ~2720 K [9,[12], [13], [14]]. The higher melting points observed in UxCy is generally attributed to the strong metal-carbon bonds. However, the melting point of hypo-stochiometric (C/U < 1.0) compositions are significantly lower due to the presence of metallic uranium. Houyvet [15] reported that the melting points of UC1.0, UC2, and U2C3 range from 2473 to 2913 K, 2623 to 2773 K, and 1973 to 2113 K, respectively. Tetenbaum et al. [4] complied an exhaustive list of the melting points of uranium, plutonium, and mixed carbides from contemporary literature. The melting point of UC1.0 was reported to range between 2763 and 2863 K with varying amounts of oxygen and nitrogen impurities. Tetenbaum et al. [14] also documented the decomposition point for uranium sesquicarbide (U2C3) to be between 2092 and 2170 K with similar impurities. The current authors recommend the use of melting points : UC1.0 ~ 2780 ± 25 K and U2C3 ~ 2100 ± 25 K, (decomposition temperature) and UC2 ~ 2698 ± 25 K based on the median values of the ranges reported by Houyvet [15] and Tetenbaum et al. [14].
Houyvet [15] reported the theoretical densities of UC1.0, U2C3, and UC2 to be: 13.63, 12.88, and 11.68 g/cm3, respectively. These values agree closely with those reported by other authors in the literature [9,16] and is recommended for use by the current authors. As expected, the density varies with carbon content as shown in Fig. 1. A linear representation of the density versus the carbon content trend reported by Rough and Chubb [16] is given in Eq. (1) (where d is the density in g/cm3 and ‘y/x’ is the C/U ratio). It is recommended that readers apply appropriate porosity corrections to this equation using expressions provided in the following sections of this manuscript.
@(1)
Fig. 1. Variation of UxCy density with carbon content.
A recent detailed analysis of the uranium-carbon phase diagram (Fig. 2) is presented by Manara et al. [12], warranting only a high-level discussion in the current manuscript. The U-C phase-diagram indicates three main compositions: UC1.0, U2C3 and UC2-x .
Fig. 2. Uranium-Carbon phase diagram [12].
UC1.0 clearly has the highest melting point that slightly decreases as carbon content increases in the bound and unbound form while the hyper-stochiometric composition UC1.6 has the lowest melting point at 2670 K. The low temperature solubility of carbon in uranium is reported to be 3–10 ppm, depending on the uranium phase, but increases at temperatures beyond 1500 K [12]. The phase diagram reported by Manara et al. [12] indicates that UC1.0 is stable until its melting point is reached, but it can exist in carbon-rich (hyper-stoichiometric; C/U or y/x > 1.0) and carbon-deficient (hypo-stoichiometric; C/U or y/x < 1.0) compositions beyond 1400 K.
Although the hypo-stoichiometric compositions are rarely mentioned in the literature, a definitive phase diagram shown in Fig. 2 indicates the presence of free uranium metal along with the monocarbide—a phenomenon observed in other carbides, such as ZrC [17]. Possible changes in stoichiometry were first hypothesized by Williams et al. [18] when a change in the lattice parameter was noticed in what was assumed to be pure UC1.0 fabricated by arc-casting followed by quenching. A detailed analysis of the change in lattice parameter from 4.960 to 4.952 Å revealed that this change was not due to the formation of isomorphs (example: UN and UO) from impurity contamination but rather due to the change in carbon content [18]. The phenomenon of UxCy occurring in a range of stoichiometric variations are very typical of some transition metal carbides such as ZrC [17]. As evident from the phase diagram, UC1.0 phase can generally be isolated from an equilibrated hypo-stoichiometric composition by using suitable methods to separate metallic uranium [19].
The U-C phase diagram indicates the dicarbide as a hypo-stoichiometric composition (C<2.0) with distinct α and β phases. The tetragonal α -phase occurs at temperatures between 1753 K and 2050 K transforming into the cubic (fcc, KCN) β –phase at the higher temperature through a diffusion-less process. Literature reports dicarbide compositions ranging between UC1.89 and UC1.92 from the α-β phase transition temperature up to the eutectic temperature . It is noted here that the exact equilibrium compositions of the α and β dicarbide phases are currently unclear and for the purpose of clarity, this manuscript continues to use the term ‘dicarbide’ and the associated chemical formula ‘UC2’ to represent compositions ranging between UC1.89 and UC1.92 where detailed information on either the phase or the exact compositions are not available in the referenced literature. It is also reported that UC2 is completely soluble in the monocarbide beyond 2300 K. UC2 could be produced during rapid quenching of molten UC1.0 and solid carbon. However, UC2 rapidly transforms into the U2C3 at temperatures beyond 1753 K unless stabilized by oxygen impurity. The dicarbide phase decomposes very slowly into the sesqui-carbide and carbon below 1753 K. To denote this slow reaction, some authors report a meta-stable U-C phase diagram that eliminates the sesquicarbide . However, in the present manuscript it was thought relevant to preserve the full U-C phase diagram, to make the readers aware of the complexity and associated opportunities to improve the phase diagram. The monocarbide and dicarbide are the most thermally stable phases while the sesquicarbide is reported to decompose at temperatures ranging from 2030 to 2110 K [22]. However once formed below these decomposition temperatures, it can be easily produced via quenching and is thermodynamically stable until the decomposition temperature.
Litz et al. [23] was one of the first to report on the crystal structure of UC1.0 fabricated from UO2 and carbon mixtures using the Debye-Scherrer method [23]. Analysis revealed that although the monocarbide structure was very similar to the face-centered cubic (fcc) sodium chloride (NaCl) crystal, the dicarbide resembled the structure of tetragonal calcium carbide. A phase transformation in UC2 is reported to occur at around 2343 K from tetragonal to cubic (KCN). The body-centered cubic (bcc) structure of U2C3 was also reported.
Lattice parameters of UC1.0 reported in the literature range between 4.961–4.995 Å(a0), those of UC2 between 3.517 to 3.54 Å (a0) and 5.987- 5.99 Å (c0), and that of U2C3 to be ~8.088 Å (a0) [24,25]. Rundle et al. [25] reported the potential to dissolve small amounts of excess carbon in the dicarbide via quenching. This was evident from the apparent reduction in lattice parameters observed in samples quenched at 2400 and 2800 K. The authors also reported that samples that were not quenched were observed to precipitate excess carbon during fabrication. This behavior is observed in other transition metal carbides, such as ZrC in which the stoichiometric phase can accommodate small amounts of excess carbon in the lattice [17]. However, as the carbon content increases, the composition becomes more nonhomogeneous with carbon inclusions precipitated at the grain boundaries significantly impacting the bulk thermal and mechanical properties.
Although extensive confirmatory information is currently not available on the effect of impurities on the wide variations reported in monocarbide lattice parameters, fabrication using oxide or nitride precursors are expected to have some impurities which may affect the lattice parameter measurements [21]. While the presence of oxygen leads to dilation of the lattice parameter (peaking at around 2000 ppm of oxygen), nitrogen impurity results in slight reduction of the same. These are partially attributed to the nature of U-O-C and U-C-N bonds [12]. This has been observed in analogous carbides such as ZrC where small impurities lead to wide variations in the measured lattice parameters [17,21].
The lattice parameter variations in the monocarbide as a function of the carbon content reported in the literature are shown in Fig. 3. The trend clearly indicates a reduction with increasing carbon content in the hypo-stoichiometric composition up until near C/U = 1.0 before increasing slightly again as C/U goes into the hyper-stoichiometric range. From the data reported by Williams et al. [18] it is observed that the lattice parameter of the annealed hypo-stoichiometric compositions increased relative to the as-fabricated specimens. Form the U-C phase diagram shown in Fig. 2, it can be deduced that the samples fabricated at high temperatures (arc-melting) could have some amounts of UC1-x phases depending on the fabrication temperatures, carbon reactant and cooling rate. However as these were not analyzed, the C/U ratios reported by Williams et al. [18] do not necessarily correlate to the exact sample stoichiometry. At best it can be conjectured that the arc-melted samples contained an unknown quantity of non-equilibrated UC1-x phase(s). As expected, annealing provided the necessary driving force to start equilibration of the composition. Although no data on extended annealing (beyond 88 h) was reported, it could perhaps be argued that such a process would eventually result in a mixture of UC1.0 and metallic U. Nevertheless, it is evident from the data presented by Williams et al. [18] that the lattice parameter is also dependent on the processing conditions in addition to the presence of impurities.
Fig. 3. Variation of lattice parameter with C/U ratio.
3. Heat capacity
The molar heat capacity indicates the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 mole of the fuel by 1 K. This property is especially important in nuclear fuel materials where neutron cross-sections (hence reactivity) are temperature dependent. The low-temperature heat capacity of materials including that of uranium, depends on the specific heat coefficient and Debye temperature (TDebye of UC1.0 ~ 256–366 K) [20]. A brief list of low-temperature heat capacity (Cp) values as compiled by Storms [8] is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Variation of heat capacity with C/U.
Krikorian [28] proposed the following equations Eqs. (2) & (3) to represent the variation of heat capacity as a function of temperature in UC1.0 and UC2 between 298 and 2000 K.
@(2)
@(3)
Macleod [29] recommended the heat capacity equation of UC1.9 (Eq. (4)) for use between 298 and 1800 K from enthalpy measurements by using adiabatic drop calorimeter method.
@(4)
The current authors recommend using Eq. (5) to represent the variation of cp with temperature for UC1.0. This equation suggested by an International Atomic Energy Agency panel takes into account the low-temperature heat capacity data presented by other authors, including Westrum et al. [26] and Farr et al. [27], and high-temperature heat capacity measurements by Harrington and Rowe [13], Otteing et al. [30], and Storms [9] over an extended temperature range of 300 to 2400 K.
@(5)
Apart from the three common UxCy compounds, there is very little information on the thermodynamic properties of hypo- and hyper-stoichiometric UxCy.
Otteing et al. [30] reported the results of experimental measurements of enthalpies of arc-melted UC1.0, UC2, and U2C3 between 500 and 1700 K. The determined values were in excellent agreement with the calculated values. The reported enthalpies for three carbides are shown in Eqs. (6),(7), and (8) for UC1.0, UC1.5, and UC2, respectively and are recommended by the current authors.
@(6)
@(7)
@(8)
4. Overview of UC fabrication
Various traditional and non-traditional methods largely centered on the fabrication of UC1.0 have been reported in the literature, with the di- and sesqui-carbides reported only as lower-level products or even as unintended impurities. A summary of reported UxCy formation reactions and the initiation temperatures (where available) are listed in Table 2.
Table 2. Summary of UCx fabrication methods.
Most common among bulk fabrication methods is the carbothermic reduction reaction in which a suitable oxide of uranium (e.g., UO2, U3O8) is mixed with a carbon source and cycled through a long duration, high-temperature thermal process. The carbothermic reduction often requires temperatures in the range of 1400 to 2000 K [23,31] where the temperature is roughly inversely proportional to the reaction duration. However, these methods suffer from the presence of oxygen impurities resulting in the formation of oxy-carbide phases [5] which further tends to increase the process durations depending upon the desired purity. Farr et al. [27] and Litz et al. [23] report the fabrication of the UxCy the carbothermic reduction method using U3O8, where the reaction was apparently complete at temperatures close to 2100 K.
An alternative route is the direct synthesis of UxCy by a combination of highly reactive metallic U or U-hydride precursors with a carbon source. This method can be employed to produce purer compositions relative to the carbothermic reduction method if the oxidation of uranium is precisely controlled and/or avoided. Storms & Huber [9] report the formation of UC1.0 at temperatures as low as 920 K and UC2 above 1450 K by the direct reaction of uranium metal with carbon, although the details of the conversion efficiency and the resulting phase purities are unavailable. Houyvet [15] reports the fabrication of UC1.0 by reacting uranium hydride with carbon via a hydride-dehydride process. A similar method is also described by Vasudevamurthy et al. [5] in context of fabrication of UxCy for GFR composite fuels. This method employs pure but very fine, highly reactive uranium metal and/or uranium hydride and graphite powders ball milled and subject to combustion synthesis. Although this ensures the avoidance of large-scale oxygen impurities from the uranium metal, the use of this method on a commercial scale could be critically limited by the pyrophoric nature of uranium metal and/or hydride requiring highly controlled processing environments. As with the carbothermic reduction, this method too suffers from the challenges associated with controlling the phase purity of the final product.
Other less traditional methods have also been reported in the literature. For example, Litz et al. [23] reported the fabrication of high-purity UxCy from the hydrolysis of uranium metal by using a specialized vacuum apparatus to handle the pyrophoric reactants and products with methane as a carbon source. A favorable reaction was observed at temperatures as low as 898 K. UC1.0 has also been fabricated with heavier gaseous hydrocarbons, such as propane and butane reacting with uranium metal as reported by Noburu et al. [33]. Mukaibo et al. [19] report the production of high-purity UC1.0 by reacting uranium tetrachloride (UCl4) with graphite with the addition of Aluminum as a powerful reducing additive to remove and manage byproduct chlorine gas. The authors report the formation of pure monocarbide with this method at temperatures as low as 1170 K. It was shown that any unreacted uranium tetrachloride employed in this method can be recovered via condensation. .
Although UC2 can be fabricated by reacting UC1.0 with excess carbon at high temperatures and quenching, controlling the exact composition to yield a high purity product is always a major challenge [5,23]. It is also noted here that the exact dicarbide stoichiometry (C/U = 2.0) cannot be achaived as the dicarbide phase always occurs as a hypo-stoichiometric composition (UC2-x) as discussed in Section 2. U2C3 can be fabricated via the thermal decomposition of a mixture of UC1.0 and UC2.0 phases and carbon at temperatures ranging between 1470 and 2020 K [22].
5. U-C bonding
The bonding between uranium and carbon consists of an octet of electrons in a 6d5f uranium – 3p carbon or a 7 s.6d5f uranium – 3p carbon linkage [34]. This bonding is strongly covalent, with coexisting weaker metallic U-U bonds. As apparent in later sections, even with this strong covalent bonding, these compounds exhibit higher than anticipated thermal and electrical conductivities due to the availability of free electrons characterized by the existence the U-U bonds in hypo-stoichiometric and Csingle bondC bonds in hyper-stoichiometric compositions. Table 3 compares the bond energies of U-C along with some common compounds that are of interest to the nuclear community.
Table 3. Bond energies.
In UC1.0, the carbon atoms occupy the tetrahedral interstitial sites to form a close-packed structure. Since uranium is considered both a transition metal and an actinide, the carbon atoms donate electrons, potentially filling up the d- and f-bands of the uranium atoms mimicking a metallic-type bonding. UC1.0 differs from UO2 in this regard in that the latter is a covo-ionically bonded compound and the former is a covo-metallically bonded compound.
6. Thermal conductivity
UC1.0 as a nuclear fuel composition is prized for its high thermal conductivity. This is partly because of its ~30% higher uranium loading relative to UO2. As discussed briefly in Section 5, the presence of U-U and Csingle bondC bonds with excess electrons boost the electronic contribution of the thermal conductivity.
The total thermal conductivity of UxCy like other ceramics is the sum of electronic (κe) and phonon (κp) contributions. The temperature dependence of the electronic and phonon contributions is generally opposite in nature with the electronic part increasing with temperature and the phonon part decreasing with it. The electronic contribution is inversely proportional to the electrical resistivity of the material obeying the Weideman-Franz's law, and the phonon contribution (κp) is roughly inversely proportional to the temperature above the Debye temperature.
The measured thermal conductivity of UC1.0 increases with temperature like other ceramics such as ZrC [17]. This is attributed to the increased electron mobility at higher temperatures which constitutes the electronic part albeit the increased scattering of these conduction electrons limits its positive impact on the overall high temperature thermal conductivity. The pure electronic contribution of the thermal conductivity estimated from the electrical resistivity data reported by Rough and Chubb [16], and Grossman [35] are shown in Fig. 4 and an increasing trend is clearly observed. The electronic portion of the thermal conductivity seems to have a much higher contribution than the phonon contribution at higher temperatures in UC1.0 (Fig. 4). This anomaly is also observed in other ceramics such as ZrC [17]. Lewis and Kerrisk [36] conducted a detailed review of contemporary data available on the thermal conductivity of stoichiometric variants of uranium and plutonium carbides. Although the current authors do not wish to repeat the comprehensive exercise, an effort is made to present select data that can be useful to fuel modelers.
Fig. 4. Variation of thermal conductivity with oxygen content and temperature along with calculated electronic thermal conductivity of UC1.0.
The thermal conductivity of UC1.0 between 323 and 2573 K as proposed by Lewis and Kerrisk [36] are given by Eqs. (9) and (10). Although a discontinuity manifests around 923 K in the trends, the actual reason for this is currently not clear. At best, the discontinuity could be conjectured to have its roots in the alpha (orthorhombic) to beta (tetragonal) phase transition in uranium at around the same temperature (~940 K). However, at present this cannot be confirmed as the root cause as the same behavior is not observed at 1050 K where beta uranium undergoes a second transition to gamma (bcc) phase. Nevertheless, it is important to note that extending Eq. (9) beyond 923 K yields a considerable deviation from the trend predicted by Eq. (10). Although this seemingly indicates a strong dependence of the thermal conductivity on the uranium crystal structure, no experimental data to support this hypothesis is currently available in the open literature.
Thus, with limited data currently available, the authors recommend the use of the following equations for the purposes of fuel modeling until a new set of precise measurements can be reported in the future.
@(9)
@(10)
Further, the thermal conductivity of UxCy is significantly affected by several parameters including impurity content (mostly oxygen), carbon content, microstructure, and porosity like in other materials. Fig. 4 also shows the variation in UC1.0 conductivity with oxygen content, indicating an expected negative effect. This further emphasizes the need for proper selection of fabrication methods that can yield high purity UxCy compositions for them to effectively compete as a feasible nuclear fuel composition.
Fig. 5 shows the effect of carbon content on the room temperature thermal conductivity of UxCy. The room temperature thermal conductivity of UxCy shows a high dependence on the C/U ratio in the hypo-stoichiometric range before plateauing. The data presented by Lewis and Kerrisk [36] shows a lower conductivity in hypo-stoichiometric composition compared to hyper-stochiometric composition. The trends reported by Crane and Gordon [37] on the effects of carbon content on the temperature dependent thermal conductivity is shown in Fig. 6. The data indicate UC1.0 with lower thermal conductivity compared to hypo- and hyper-stochiometric compositions at lower temperatures. This could perhaps be attributed to the sample characteristics such as porosity and impurity content, the details of which are not made available. Since equilibrated hypo-stoichiometric UxCy can exist as a mixture of UC1.0 and free metallic uranium, the increased values can be attributed to excess metal's thermal conductivity dominating over that of the UC1.0.
Fig. 5. Variation of room temperature thermal conductivity with carbon content [36].
Fig. 6. Variation of thermal conductivity with carbon content and temperature [37].
Like all materials, porosity affects the thermal conductivity of UxCy. Porosity is first introduced during sample or fuel fabrication and enhances during irradiation. Generally, a porosity correction for the thermal conductivity (κ corrected) is suggested, as given by Eq. (11), (where P is the pore volume fraction, and κTD is the maximum thermal conductivity of the sample with near-zero porosity).
@(11)
More complex corrections for the effect of porosity on thermal conductivity of UO2 are currently available in the porosity range generally relevant to nuclear fuel performance i.e., greater than 85% theoretical density but will required exhaustive studies to confirm these correlations for UxCy [38,39].
7. Thermal expansion
Thermal expansion of nuclear fuel becomes a concern both during the fabrication step and in-reactor operation. Uncontrolled thermal expansion due to high temperature excursions during abnormal events could result in severe pellet cladding interactions resulting in fuel containment breach. A survey of existing literature reveals the scarcity in reliable experimental data on the thermal expansion of UxCy and highlights the critical need for future detailed studies to fill in the data gaps and strengthen the database.
Fig. 7, [37] [37] [42] [42] [28] [28] [40] [40] [28] [28] [28] [28] Fig. 8 show the percentage change in the linear dimensions and the coefficient of thermal expansion of UxCy as a function of the temperature as reported by various authors. Mendez and Taylor [40] report the data on thermal expansion of arc-cast UC1.0 with densities >99.3% and <300 ppm impurities (oxygen and nitrogen) as a function of temperature and carbon content (Fig. 8). Mendez and Taylor [40] suggest an average coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) of 11.2 × 10–6/K from 300 to 1273 K and 12.4 × 10–6/K from 1273 to 2273 K for UC1.0. Crane et al. [41] estimated the CTE of arc-cast UC0.95 and UC1.0 to be 12.4 × 10–6/K and 11.5 × 10–6/K, respectively at temperatures of up to 1273 K.
Fig. 7. Variation of percent change in linear dimensions vs. temperature.
Fig. 8. Variation of CTE with temperature and carbon content.
Richards [42] reported the thermal expansion of sintered, carbon-rich (C/U: 1.05 and 1.9) UxCy at temperatures up to 3000 K using a simple electrical contact method. The average values of the CTE ranged between 12.6 and 15.5 × 10–6/K and were slightly higher than those reported by Mendez and Taylor [40] and Crane et al. [41]. The higher values were partially attributed to the cross contamination from the tantalum boat used during sample refinement and measuring experiments. Nickerson & Kastenberg [43] report a compilation of CTEs of arc-cast and sintered UC1.0 from various contemporary sources. While the listed CTE for the arc-cast samples vary between 10.2 and 12.6 × 10–6/K in the corresponding temperature interval of 673 and 1673 K, the CTE of the sintered material was between 8.1 and 11.3 × 10–6/K in the same temperature range. It is suspected here with the differences in processing, the arc-cast samples probably contained larger quantities of non-equilibrated UC1-x phases compared to the sintered samples in addition to the lower porosity in the latter which seem to explain the observed differences. Further, the CTE for UC2 was reported be ~18 × 10–6 /K (α-phase) between 1273 and 2038 K and ~25 × 10–6 /K (β-phase) between 2038 and 2573 K, and that of U2C3 was listed as ~10.5 × 10–6 /K for temperatures below 1273 K and 13.5 × 10–6 /K for temperatures above 1273 up to its decomposition.
In general, the data shown in Fig. 8 agree well with <10% deviations. These deviations could be the result of impurity atoms occupying carbon vacancies, especially in hypo-stoichiometric UxCy. With this data available currently, it is possible to suggest equations that relate CTE to the temperature variations, as shown in Table 4.
Table 4. CTE expressions for varying stoichiometries.
8. Electrical properties
The electrical resistivity of UC1.0 is considerably lower than UN. The reported Hall constant of UC1.0 is +1.4 × 10–4 cm3/K, classifying it as a semi-metallic electronic conductor. Although UxCy are not of interest as electrical insulators or conductors, the electrical resistivity is traditionally used to quickly assess the extent of irradiation damage in nuclear materials and hence is considered an important property. A comprehensive literature review of the electrical properties of UxCy was first reported by Lewis and Kerrisk [36]. The expression for the electrical resistivity of 100% theoretical dense UC1.0 between 300 and 1870 K as recommended by Lewis and Kerrisk [36] is given by Eq. (12)
@(12)
As with thermal conductivity, the electrical resistivity also depends on the porosity and carbon content. The resistivity increases with increasing carbon content and porosity. For example, the resistivity of UC1.98 was reported to be ~30 µΩcm more than that of UC1.0 between 325 and 675 K [45]. Grossman [35] reported the temperature dependence of the electrical resistivities of UC1.0 and UC2 between 1100 and 2052 K as given by Eqs. (13) and 14 respectively. The representative line plots of these equations are shown in Fig. 9 along with the trends of Eq. (12) reported by Lewis and Kerrisk [36] and data points reported by Menshikova [46]. Additionally, the porosity dependent correction factors for the electrical resistivity of UC1.0 as suggested by Bates [47] is given in Eq. (15) (where ‘P’ is the pore volume fraction and  is the theoretical maximum value of the electrical resistivity).
@(13)
@(14)
@(15)
Fig. 9. Variation of electrical resistivity of UC1.0 and UC2 with temperature.
The current authors recommend the use of Eq. (12) to estimate of the electrical resistivity of UC1.0 between 300 and 1870 K as the predicted trend lies between the data reported by Menshikova [46] and that provided by Griffith [48]. For temperatures beyond 1870 K, Eq 0.13 may be employed. In both cases it is suggested that appropriate porosity corrections be applied as proposed by Bates [47].
9. Elastic constants and moduli
The first comprehensive measurements of elastic constants and properties, such as bulk, shear and elastic moduli, were reported by Routbort [49]. Elastic constants (Table 5) of single crystal hypo-stoichiometric UxCy (C/U~0.934) fabricated by radiofrequency induction float-zone method was measured using ultrasonic wave velocity measurement techniques.
Table 5. Elastic constants of UC0.934 [49].
These constants were then used to estimate the various moduli of UxCy (C/U: 0.934, 0.964, and 1.034). The recommended room temperature values of the moduli, Poisson's ratio, and the Debye temperatures are listed in Table 6.
Table 6. Room temperature moduli of UxCy.
Although the variation of Young's modulus with temperature has not been extensively documented, based on the few data points currently available it can be deduced that the modulus decreases with increasing temperature. Padel & Novion [50] report a steep decrease of ~20% in the young's modulus at 1573 K relative to the room temperature values. The variation of modulus with temperature as reported by Menshikova et al. [46] and the approximate temperature dependence is shown in Fig. 10. Based on the data fit the variation of the elastic modulus of UC1.0 with temperature can be expressed as Eq. (16).
@(16)
Fig. 10. Variation of Young's modulus of UC1.0 with temperature [46].
10. Hardness
Hardness is a property that represents the material's resistance to local plastic deformation. Indentation hardness testing is widely used to obtain information related to the strength of the material. Unlike many transition and refractory metal carbides, information on the hardness of UxCy is limited in the open literature and pertains to Knoop hardness tests. The hardness values of arc-cast UxCy have been reported to increase with carbon content, peaking for compositions containing around 60 a/0 (U2C3) of carbon before decreasing [34]. This phenomenon also observed with other transition metal carbides [17]. The room temperature Knoop hardness of arc-cast UC1.0 is between 500 and 900 kg/mm2, whereas those of UC2 and U2C3 are reported to be between 450 and 500 kg/mm2 and 700 to 950 kg/mm2, respectively [15]. The large variations in the hardness values are attributed to the sample characteristics (i.e., porosity, impurities, and grain sizes). Although the data on the variation of hardness with temperature is extremely limited, the hardness is reported to decrease significantly with temperature (Fig. 11), indicating the onset of plastic behavior at temperatures. For example, the hardness values of arc-cast UC1.0 are reported to drop from 900 kg/mm2 at room temperature to about 100 kg/mm2 at 1073 K indicating onset of significant plasticity. Menshikova [46] reports ductile to brittle transition occurring between 1400 – 1700 K for UC1.0. Extensive confirmatory data is currently not available to support the generalized observations of ductile to brittle transition temperature (DBTT) or its dependence on the stoichiometry and requires further experimental considerations.
Fig. 11. Variation of polycrystalline UC1.0 hardness with temperature [46].
11. Compressive and rupture strength
The fracture strength of ceramics including UxCy largely depends on the intrinsic fracture toughness, grain size, and existence and distribution of flaws, which in turn depend on fabrication history [51]. Variations in sample characteristics thus leads to large variations in measured values of strength. Eyre and Bartlett [52] reported microstructural evidence of slip occurring on (111) in the [110] direction in single crystal UC1.0 at temperatures between 1680 and 2200 K. However, no conclusive experimental data is currently available at lower temperatures. The fracture surface energy of UC1.0 is reported to be in the range of 1 J/m2 at 1300 K [53]. Frost [54] compiled the compressive and rupture strengths of arc-cast UxCy with carbon compositions ranging from 4.8 to 7.0 w/0 (UC1.0-UC1.27). The average values of the room temperature compressive strength of UC1.0 was ~355 MPa, whereas that of UC1.27 was reported to be ~453 MPa with little details on the sample characteristics available. Similar values were reported by Nickerson and Kastenberg [43] compiled from various sources. Strength seems to increase with the carbon content, a phenomenon also observed with the hardness and moduli described in the previous sections. In contrast, Rough and Chubb [46] report the transverse rupture strengths of compositions containing ~4.8 w/0 carbon (UC 1.0) to be ~104 MPa compared to ~ 68 MPa with samples containing 5 w/0, carbon (UC1.04) . A possible explanation for this large variation in the strength with slight changes in carbon content is the precipitation of carbon at the grain boundaries. The presence of a softer carbon phase at the grain boundaries can lead to significant lowering of fracture strengths compared to the stoichiometric phase. Furthermore, the high-temperature compressive strength of UC1.0 reportedly varies noticeably with temperature (Fig. 12) with an initial increase in strength and an observable onset of plasticity followed by a steep decrease at temperatures beyond 1270 K. This indicates the susceptibility of UC1.0 to high-temperature creep similar to that observed in ZrC [17].
Fig. 12. Variation of compressive strength of UC with temperature.
12. Thermal creep
Thermal creep is important in many nuclear fuels, given the extended time they are subjected to high temperatures and stresses, the importance of retained geometry to fuel performance, and the impact that fuel expansion has in producing negative responses such as fuel-cladding interaction. Thermal creep in UC1.0 has been historically investigated to a limited extent, and it is generally agreed that creep follows the well-established power law relationship given in Eq. (17) (where  is the creep rate, σ is the applied stress, n is the stress exponent, Q is the activation energy, R is the universal gas constant and T is the temperature).
@(17)
High temperature creep rate in materials is controlled by either dislocation climb and glide characterized as dislocation creep or diffusion-controlled vacancy motion characterized by diffusional or Nabarro-Herring creep. A distinction between the two creep mechanisms can normally be deduced from the values of the stress exponential factor (n) resulting from high temperature mechanical tests. The value of n closer to 1 is generally classified as Nabarro-Herring creep, whereas higher values of n is deemed dislocation creep [55]. The value shows that the creep strain in the material depends on the applied stresses at the given temperature. Although both creep mechanisms occur at higher temperatures, dislocation creep activates at instances of much higher stresses than the simpler diffusional creep as the required activation energies are generally much higher.
Table 7 summarizes different creep-related parameters associated with UxCy compositions reported in the literature. The stress exponents widely vary between 1 and 6 and does not currently allow the easy classification (relative to some metals and ceramics) of the creep mechanism in UxCy without further dedicated and controlled experiments. As expected, thermal creep in hypo-stoichiometric UxCy is more prominent and accelerated than in hyper-stochiometric UxCy, attributed to the presence of free uranium metal in the former. Like in many other carbides, the equilibrated hypo-stoichiometric composition exists as a mixture of metallic uranium and UC1.0, whereas the hyper-stoichiometric composition could exist as a mixture of carbon and UC1.0 or any of the higher carbides (mostly UC2-x) and carbon. Hence, each of these precipitates (metallic uranium or carbon) will have a dominant effect on the overall deformation behavior of a particular UxCy composition. Along these lines, the creep strength of the slightly hyper-stoichiometric composition is expected to be higher than the hypo-stoichiometric composition [56]. The composition with slightly higher carbon contents (e.g., 0.2 w/0 excess) is reported to exhibit up to ~25% less creep rate than UC1.0. This phenomenon is also observed in other carbides such as ZrC, in which the carbon/graphitic phases in the hyper-stochiometric compositions are often precipitated at the grain boundaries, thus increasing the creep resistance [17]. Additionally, the increased self-diffusion in hypo-stochiometric compositions is expected to increase the creep rate with increased contributions from grain boundary sliding aided by the presence of metallic uranium [57]. Another important observation from Table 7 is the disagreements in the reported activation energies. Although the activation energy determined by Seltzer et al. [56] and Stellercht et al. [58] were closer to that of uranium self-diffusion in UC1.0 (~4.51 eV), the ones determined by Norreys et al. [59], Chang [60], and Fassler et al. [61] were closer to that of carbon self-diffusion (~2.78 eV) in UC1.0 [24,34,62,63] in similar temperature regimes. Based on the activation energy comparisons, it would be harder for uranium to diffuse relative to carbon in UxCy; thus, uranium self-diffusion would be the rate-controlling mechanism. This should indicate that hyper-stoichiometric compositions should creep at a higher rate than hypo-stoichiometric compositions, however the contrary is observed. This can be attributed to the fact that hyper-stoichiometric compositions often contain carbon/graphitic phases discretely precipitated along the boundaries of grains containing near stoichiometric composition rather than as solid solutions within the grains. These weaker brittle phases often initiate premature bulk fracture which gives an overall impression of reduced or suppressed plasticity at higher temperatures. This unavoidable phenomenon due to the very nature of hyper-stoichiometric compositions make it impossible to deconvolute the behaviors of the stoichiometric phase (within the grains) and the graphitic phases (at the grain boundaries). This feature along with the grain size and other characteristics related parameters such as impurities and porosity are expected to significantly affect the creep behavior. However, with the limited data available, it is currently not possible to objectively assess the impact of the grain size on the creep of UxCy like many other carbides of the same class. Again, such phenomena are observed in other transitional carbides, such as ZrC [17] and need further detailed experimental considerations.
Table 7. Summary of thermal creep results for UxCy.
13. Chemical reactivity
Limited experimental studies have been conducted to assess the reactivity of UxCy with various chemical reagents, although the reactivity of metallic uranium is well-documented. Currently only a handful of reliable comprehensive sources on the reactivity of UxCy with other materials are available in the open literature [20]. This section attempts to summarize only the most significant studies found in these that are especially relevant to current and future reactor designs.
The superior compatibility of UxCy with hydrogen [65] at high temperatures is well-known and recognized in the design of high-temperature reactors, especially in context of the nuclear rocket development program. On the other hand, UxCy’s interaction with oxygen can occur at temperatures as low as 300 K [12,20]. Fine UC1.0 powder (<1 µm) will undergo exothermic reaction when exposed to air at room temperatures, while larger sized UC1.0 and UC2 are slightly more stable [66]. Dell and Wheeler [67] reported the ignition of UC1.1 and U0.93 powders in oxygen. It was observed that the samples ignited at temperatures beyond 640 K under an oxygen partial pressure of ~68 KPa after the oxidation reaction had reached ~20% completion. The authors also show that UN is more stable in an oxidative environment compared to carbides which is viewed as a critical advantage of UN in certain accident scenarios. In experiments with controlled flow of oxygen and partial pressures <10 KPa, UC1.0 is known to react to form oxides. The reaction rate is controlled by the formation of UO2 and/or U3O8 passivation layers and the diffusion of oxygen through those layers [12,20]. Oxidation proceeds with chronic spalling of the passivation layer brought about by the unit cell level volumetric changes (35–36% increase from UC1.0 to UO2) in the material due to the chemical reaction. The conversion of exposed UC1.0 surface first to UO2 and then to higher oxides such as U3O8 depends on how rapidly the fresh surface is exposed or in other words the spalling rate which in turn is controlled by the diffusion of oxygen into the oxide layer and the reaction temperature [68]. The general equation for the oxidative reaction of UxCy is given by Eq. (18).
@(18)
The oxidation reaction UC1.0 obeys the linear rate law at lower temperature with rates in the range of 1–3 mg/cm2/h at 623 K increasing to ~ 350 mg/cm2/h at 1300 K. This steep increase is predominantly due to the increased diffusion of oxygen deep into the sub-surface. The reported activation energies of the oxidation reaction of UC1.0 range between 0.9 and 1.26 eV [20,69,70]. Studies conducted by authors like Dell and Wheeler [67] have shown that at oxygen partial pressures > 50 Pa and temperatures > 773 K, sudden spalling/cracking of the passivation layer could lead to self-ignition of UC1.0. Manara et al. [12] provide a detailed discussion and models on the oxidation of UC1.0 . The model depicts the formation of an intermediary UCO (oxy-carbide) phase which forms at lower temperatures ~410 K. Incidentally, the UCO phase is considered an important fuel composition due to its ability to better sequester lanthanide fission products by facilitating the formation of lanthanide oxides which are more stable than their respective carbides and are preferred in particle fuels as described elsewhere [5,12,17]. However, as the temperature increases to about 473 K, the conversion of the UCO passivation layer to UO2 is observed. Depending on the partial pressure of oxygen either a slow diffusion-controlled conversion of UC1.0 to UO2 or spalling followed an exothermic conversion to UO2 is observed. The intense heat released during such an exothermic event has been observed to accelerate the conversion of UO2 to higher oxides such as U3O8 via a self-heating synthesis reaction [71]. It is generally anticipated that at higher temperatures (>1000 K) and partial pressures of oxygen, carbon that normally precipitates out during the oxidation reaction would also react with free oxygen to form CO and CO2 accelerating spalling of the passivation layers.
Griess [72] conducted a thorough review of the available literature on the interactions between UC1.0 and water. The principal gaseous products of the hydrolysis of UC1.0 were found to be methane and hydrogen gas. The solid byproduct of the reaction was tetravalent UO2. Literature also reports the formation of small quantities of aromatic hydrocarbons and in-soluble wax-like substances with high carbon contents. The activation energy for the low-temperature hydrolysis of UC1.0 is reported to be ~0.76 eV. As expected, the hypo- and hyper-stoichiometric compositions react at different rates, with the former being more reactive than the later due to the presence of excess metallic uranium, although some reports do suggest a higher rate of hydrolysis in pure UC2 compared to UC1.0. Selective attacks based on the micro-texture have also been reported at lower temperatures. Hydrolysis was observed to be more prominent along crystallographic cleavage planes, leading to structural disintegration followed by the rapid evolution of gasses [20]. Studies have also noted that an increase in the carbon content leads to an evolution of higher molecular weight hydrocarbon gasses during hydrolysis that indicate polymerization, a phenomenon not yet fully understood. The presence of impurities, such as refractory metals introduced during fabrication, are known to increase the release of hydrogen gas and reaction rates significantly. Fresh UC1.0 is reported to react little with steam at temperatures below 423 K with almost instantaneous reaction occurring at temperatures beyond 973 K. The activation energy of the reaction with steam between 325 and 365 K was reported to be ~0.564 eV with not much data available in the higher temperature regimes [20].
At high temperatures UC1.0 interacts with both gaseous nitrogen and some of its prominent compounds like NH3 [73,74]. The reaction with nitrogen results in the formation of higher nitrides of uranium (example: U2N3) and the precipitation of free carbon [20]. Hanson [73] reported the reaction of UC1.0 with nitrogen with the formation of U2N3 below 925 K which decomposed to form UN above this temperature. The reaction rates depended on the composition and size of the samples, where a lower rate was observed in hypo-stoichiometric compositions. Like the oxidation reaction, the formation of a U2N3 passivation layer was found to be the rate controlling mechanism below 925 K before switching over to a combination of formation and decomposition of U2N3 [74]. The estimated activation energies were in the range of 1.38 to 1.62 eV. The reaction between UC1.0 and NH3 occurs in the temperature range of 873 to 1073 K resulting in the formation of nitrogen rich U2N3. The carbon precipitated from the chemical reaction forms CH4 due to the high catalytic activity of NH3. At high enough temperatures (>2000 K), the reaction between UxCy and UN leads to the formation of a special class of compounds known as the carbo-nitrides (U(C,N)) which again are of some interest to the nuclear fuels community. As detailed discussions on these compounds are beyond the scope of the present manuscript, interested readers are directed to the work complied and presented by Holleck & Kleykamp [20].
Literature reports the interaction of UC1.0 with silicon carbide (SiC) at temperatures above 1873 K [75], as given by Eq. (19). The diffusion reaction between the two reportedly progresses according to the relationship shown in Eq. (20). This reaction assume significance as SiC is a candidate coating material for tristructural-isotropic (TRISO) fuel [51]. The reported temperature where the two become incompatible is close to the severe accident temperature limit (~1800 K) currently specified for the TRISO fuel . The activation energy for the reaction is between 3 and 5 eV.
@(19)
@(20)
Arc-cast and sintered UC1.0 interacts with sodium metal at temperatures beyond 973 K [76]. The experiments that probed the feasibility of using sodium to thermally bond UC1.0 fuel and cladding indicated that long-duration (2000 h) exposures to sodium metal led to the significant decarburization of hyper-stoichiometric UxCy compared with the UC1.0, indicating the prominent role of excess carbon in the reaction. This was further evidenced by microstructural data, which indicated that decarburization was prominent only in stray UC2 and U2C3 phases (impurity level) present in the nominally stoichiometric UxCy. The experiments also showed that arc-cast samples decarburized more readily than the sintered samples, a phenomenon that can be partially attributed to the higher residual stresses and the presence of non-equilibrated phases in arc-cast samples. Experiments with similar results have also been reported by Menshikova et al. [46]. However, alloying hyper-stoichiometric UxCy with refractory metals such as zirconium, chromium, or titanium—tend to reduce the decarburization reaction potentially due to preferential leaching of carbon by these metals.
Studies on the interaction of arc-melted UC1.0 and molten salts, such as KCl-LiCl-ZrCl2/Zinc systems, have been reported in the literature in the context of the fused salt-liquid metal-cooled nuclear reactors. Experiments conducted between 773 and 1073 K showed no detectable interactions between UC1.0 and the molten salt-metal system, making it a potential fuel candidate in such reactors [77]. However, there is a critical need for detailed and elaborate confirmatory investigations to further ascertain the compatibility before a favorable recommendation can be made.
Arc-melted UC1.0 reacts with nitric acid (2–16 M) at temperatures between 300 and 400 K to form uranyl nitrate, soluble organic acid (oxalic acid), nitrous oxide, nitrogen dioxide, and carbon dioxide [20]. However, UC1.0 was shown to be unaffected by and passive to boiling dilute nitric acid (0.001–0.5 M) for extended periods of time [78]. Reactions of UC1.0 with other low-concentration (0.001–0.5 M) acidic regents—such as sulfuric and hydrochloric—are very similar to its reaction with water, except for any hydrocarbon gasses evolving from the reaction [79]. Active reaction was observed only in higher concentrations of acids (~1–16 M) with the formation of uranium salts (e.g., uranium chloride and uranyl nitrate), soluble organic acids, and oxides of nitrogen and carbon.
The reaction between UC1.0 and a strong base such as NaOH is reported to evolve higher quantities of hydrogen gas than the reactions with water, a phenomenon attributed to the oxidation of uranium by the alkaline media. An anomalous reduction in the reactivity of neutron-irradiated UC1.0 with water (up to 373 K) and other reagents such as hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, and sodium hydroxide has also been documented. This anomaly is attributed to the structural changes in the material brought about by the irradiation [20].
In the absence of exhaustive experimental data in the literature, it is perhaps safe to assume that UC1.0 reacts with metals such as Al, Fe, Cr, V, Mo, Zr and Ni at high enough temperatures (>700 K) where as UC2 appears to be slightly more stable than the UC1.0 [65]. While the reaction of most metals with UC1.0 predominantly results in the formation of intermetallic and complex carbide compounds (MxUy and/or MxUyCz), interaction with UC2 leads to the striping excess of carbon precipitating UC1.0 and the corresponding metal carbide. For example, aluminum is known to rapidly react with UC1.0 at temperature above 770 K [20], to form intermetallic compounds such as UAl3 and UAl4 with the precipitation of carbon as graphite, whereas the reaction with UC2 is much slower. UC1.0 is reported to melt eutectically with Cr, Nb, and Ta at ~ 1700 K making it incompatible with these metals and their primary alloys beyond this temperature. Reactions of UC1.0 and UC2 with iron at temperatures > 1273 K have been reported, with UC1.0 reacting more readily than the dicarbide [65]. Reactions with platinum group metals (example: Ru, Oz, Rh, Ir, Pd and Pt) have been observed to be more severe and exothermic in nature compared to the more common metals. Of particular concern is the high reactivity observed between UC1.0 and stainless steel after an inducting period of over 24 h. Regardless of the severity of the reactions, the formation of intermetallic phases and carburization of these metals which are the primary constituents of nuclear structural components are not considered favorable [80], and a thorough compatibility assessment will have to be performed before pairing these metals or their alloys with UC for identifying a reliable, safe, and robust fuel-cladding system.
14. Irradiation performance
Information on the irradiation performance of UxCy and its stoichiometric variants is extremely limited in the open literature. This section presents only traceable historical data to highlight the existing wide knowledge gap and emphasize the need for dedicated irradiation campaigns to fill these gaps. Because irradiation changes the inherent crystal structure of a material directly affecting the properties of materials focused efforts to document these effects are a critical necessity.
Like other nuclear fuels, UxCy undergoes swelling due to the accumulation of fission gasses, resulting in dimensional, chemical, thermal, and mechanical property changes. The extent of these changes is also affected by the stoichiometry, fluence, and irradiation temperature. Although it is nearly impossible to deconvolute the combined effects of these parameters at this time from the little data that are currently available, the dependence of irradiation-assisted property variations on temperature can—at best—be judged to be similar to other nuclear fuels. The reported irradiation-induced volumetric swelling of UC1.0 is 2.3–6.3% per 10,000 MWD/MTU (~1% burnup), and the swelling in hyper-stoichiometric samples is 3.5–8.5% per 10,000 MWD/MTU [46,81].
At lower irradiation temperatures (<1200 K), fission product diffusion is generally slow, leading to solid and gaseous product accumulation, which increases the lattice strains, leading to fracture. This phenomenon is less concerning at higher temperatures in which faster diffusion leads to lower levels of accumulated fission products, resulting in lower lattice strains. Although it has been hypothesized that swelling increases in UC1.0 with increasing temperature due to the increased production of fission gasses by using the principles of homogeneous bubble nucleation theory, conclusive experimental data and temperature limits are yet to be gathered to prove the hypothesis [82].
At present, the effects of temperature and dose on irradiation-induced swelling in UxCy can—at best—be deduced by assessing the effect of irradiation on the microstructure (formation of defect clusters) and the competing influence of temperature on defect annealing and fission gas diffusion. Matsui et al. [83] studied the influence of irradiation and temperature on the diffusion of xenon gas, which is a prominent gaseous fission product. The measured diffusion activation energies of xenon in UC1.0 varied with the irradiation dose. At lower neutron doses and temperatures below 1670 K, the irradiation-induced defects assisted in the diffusion of xenon (indicated by reduction in activation energies), thus implying little accumulation of the fission gas. However, at higher neutron doses, the gas atoms were trapped by defect clusters and helped develop bubbles, implying the onset of significant swelling. At temperatures beyond 1670 K, the xenon diffusion became independent of the dose, mostly due to the recovery of clusters and point defects, implying some type of saturation in fission gas-induced swelling.
In addition to irradiation-induced swelling, complex irradiation phase transformations have been reported in UC1.0 [22]. Experiments that involved the irradiation of UC1.01–1.1 showed the formation of U2C3 due to potential interactions between UC1.0 and residual UC2, which led to a slight increase in the fuel density and thus affected irradiation-induced swelling behavior. The formation of U2C3 was also observed at temperatures beyond 1500 K. These interactions will become critical when UC1.0 is employed with certain metallic/alloy claddings in which the carburization of the alloy/base metal leading to structural changes becomes an issue [46].
Historically, electrical resistivity measurements have been used to assess the extent of radiation damage in materials as this property is expected to increase due to the formation of irradiation-induced defects. The drastic changes in the electrical resistivity and any plateau effects (saturation) can be easily detected by simple measurement techniques [84]. Low-temperature (350 K) irradiation reported by Frost et al. [84] on reaction-sintered and annealed UC1.0 showed that the electrical resistivity increased by 0.25% at 1016 n/cm2 but plateaued at ~2.8% beyond neutron doses of 1018 n/cm2 (Fig. 13). Frost et al. [84] report a large difference in the measured unirradiated resistivity values of the samples used in the experiments compared to those reported by their contemporaries like Rough & Chubb [16]. A key factor in the differences appear to be associated with the sample fabrication method. Although the details of the dose rates are not readily available, post irradiation electrical resistivities of samples with higher carbon content were reported to increase by as much as 300–400% compared to the compositions with C/U ~1 which showed a 50–150% increase. Based on these observations, low temperature irradiation is expected to significantly reduce the electronic contribution of the thermal conductivity which is directly related to the electrical conductivity.
Fig. 13. Variation of electrical resistivity in UC1.0 as a function of neutron dose [84].
Very little is known of the irradiation effects on the mechanical properties of UxCy, especially at high temperatures. Frost [84] reported a significant decrease in bend rupture strength of UC1.0 from 94 MPa in the unirradiated state to 48 MPa under a neutron fluence of 1018 n/cm2 in addition to a shift in the fracture mode from intra- to inter-granular fracture with increasing doses. This could perhaps be attributable to onset of significant irradiation induced plasticity in the samples. Generally, in fuels the low temperature creep strain rates predominantly depend on the fission rate and the applied stresses without significant influence from the temperature and the grain sizes [85]. Irradiation experiments conducted at low temperatures (720–1027 K) have shown that UC1.0 undergoes a rapid transient creep like UO2 at doses below 1025 fissions/m3, which is partly attributed to the fission spikes. Unlike structural materials in which neutron collision induced lattice defects dominate irradiation damage, nuclear fuel materials suffer from fission spike damage (or recoil damage) due to the fission process after they are bombarded with neutrons [86]. The fission process produces highly ionized fission daughter nuclei, which can travel up to 10 µm in the fuel matrix depending on their energy. The release of energy by these nuclei due to slowdown and stoppage can cause highly localized temperature spikes (as high as 3300 K) for extremely short durations (109–1011s) [86]. While the stoppage causes significant damage to the crystal structure, the high temperature spikes that are caused due to energy deposition can help to immediately relieve the damage and in some cases precipitate localized creep. If occurring in significant numbers and spread over longer durations, these localized creep phenomenon could cumulatively manifest as thermally activated creep at the bulk scale.
This phenomenon was reported by Clough [85] in hyper-stoichiometric UxCy at temperatures of ~720 K subjected to doses between 1025 and 1026 fission/m3. As expected, the creep showed a strong dependence on the neutron fluence that was very similar to that in UO2 with rapid transient creep setting in, partially attributed to fission spikes. However, by increasing the neutron dose, a stark deviation was observed. The strain rate decreased by an order of magnitude compared with UO2 at doses above 1026 fission/m3, and the creep rate varied linearly with the applied stress. At these dose rates and irradiation temperatures, the observed values of creep strain rates were up to eight times lower than those observed in UO2. This was partly attributed to smaller fission product-induced thermo-electric stress field concentrations and better dissipation of the fission spike energy due to the electronic structure of UC1.0 compared with UO2.
With such complex phenomenon and sharply contrasting results reported in the existing literature, only focused irradiation campaigns can help with bridging the severe gap in knowledge pertaining to the irradiation behavior of UxCy compositions.
15. Summary and conclusions
Renewed interest in small-modular, high-temperature reactors around the world has left little doubt that UxCy is going to emerge as a strong contender among the select few fuel candidates. This brief survey article collected, reviewed, and refreshed the available historic and recent data on the properties of UxCy for nuclear fuel applications. An attempt has also been made to compile data corresponding to the stoichiometric variations (C/U ratio) as the carbon content is known to significantly impact the thermo-mechanical, thermo-physical and irradiation properties. Although the primary purpose of this article is to provide a compendium on properties data that could be useful to fuel modelers, the manuscript attempts to highlight existing gaps and discrepancies in existing data on this important nuclear fuel composition.
Credit author statement
Gokul Vasudevamurthy's contribution to this work includes conceptualization, data collection, analysis, and composition.
Andrew T. Nelson contribution to this work includes conceptualization, data collection, analysis, and composition
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under contract DE-AC05–00OR22725 with the US Department of Energy (DOE). The US government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the US government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for US government purposes. DOE will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).
The authors of this manuscript would like to acknowledge the contributions of Dr. Caleb Massey and Dr. Jake Hirschhorn of Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) in reviewing and suggesting improvements to this manuscript. The authors also extend special thanks to Ms. Renay Rose and Ms. Elizabeth Kirby of ORNL for their help with editing this manuscript.