<title>Efficient scavenging of uranium (VI) using porous hexagonal boron nitride by a combined process of surface adsorption and induced precipitation crystallization</title>
<author> Li Li; Yin Zhao; Yang Jin; Wensheng Linghu; Chaogui Chen; Abdullah M. Asiri; Hadi M. Marwani; Guodong Sheng</author>
<Affiliation>College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shaoxing University; Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-019-06644-0</DOI>
<URL>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-019-06644-0?utm_source=cnki&utm_medium=affiliate&utm_content=meta&utm_campaign=DDCN_1_GL01_metadata</URL>
Abstract
An ammonium/hydroxyl-enriched p-BN microrods were synthesized and the adsorption behavior of uranyl on p-BN was systematically studied. The adsorption kinetic and isotherm studies revealed the adsorption behavior is independent on electrostatic attraction or chemisorption. The results demonstrate uranyl hydrolyzed precipitated crystals are formed on the surface of p-BN at an optimized pH of 2.86 and the maximum adsorption capacity can reach 413 mg g−1 at T = 303 K. A hypothetical adsorption mechanism with a combination of surface adsorption and induced precipitation crystallization was proposed.
Introduction
Regarded as clean energy sources, the nuclear energy industry has ushered in rapid development in recent decades. Uranium is a naturally radioactive element and well-known as primary fuel for nuclear energy. With the behaviors of uranium mining, nuclear research and fuel production, excessive amounts of uranium have been released into the environment, which would cause serious health problems such as severe liver damage, kidney damage, and eventual death [1,2,3,4,5]. Increasing amount of radioactive waste has become one of most complex environmental problems and has drawn extensive attention throughout the world [6,7,8,9,10]. Therefore, it is very important for elimination of uranium exposed on the environment. Actually, numerous techniques have been reported for the removal of uranium from waste water and groundwater [11,12,13,14,15]. Of the proposed techniques, adsorption has been recognized to be extremely effective due to its high removal efficiency and simplicity in operation. In this respect, a large amount of popular materials such as carbons, zeolites, clays, polymeric materials have been utilized as adsorbents and more materials are constantly being developed for the removal of uranium [16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25].
Well known as white graphite, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) nanosheets exhibit unique two-dimensional (2D) crystalline structure similar to graphene. As 2D materials, h-BN nanosheets have drawn substantial attentions due to their chemical durability and numerous structural defects [26]. Notably, compared with common used carbon-based adsorbents, the better oxidation resistance under high temperature and “lop-sided” ionic B-N bond make the BN-based materials more preferred for application in adsorption [27]. Up to now, numerous studies indicated that BN-based materials were effective adsorbents for wastewater treatment, adsorption of heavy metal ions have been well investigated [28,29,30,31]. However, to the best of our knowledge, a comprehensive systematical study for the adsorption of uranium using BN materials is still lacking.
In the current paper, we explored the adsorption ability of porous hexagonal boron nitride (p-BN) for highly efficient scavenging of uranium (VI) ions from wastewater. An ammonium/hydroxyl-enriched p-BN microrods was prepared and characterized by SEM, TEM, BET, XRD and FTIR to confirm its conformation and structure. Batch adsorption experiments were conducted to evaluate its adsorption performance and the effects of water chemistry condition for uranium (VI) adsorption such as contact time, pH and temperature were discussed. In addition, XPS and HRTEM were utilized for the comparison of raw and adsorbed p-BN, the differences of microstructure, lattice parameter, and energy spectrum analysis were further investigated to reveal the adsorption mechanism. As a result, the adsorption behavior of uranium (VI) on p-BN was analyzed as a combination of surface adsorption and induced precipitation crystallization, a hypothetical composite mechanism was proposed and attempted to resolve experimental results and adsorption behavior.
Experimental section
Materials and reactants
All chemicals used in this experiment were of analytical reagent grade without any further purification. The p-BN microrods were synthesized by a two-step-synthesis method [31], in which the precursor is using melamine and boric acid (mole ratio = 1:2) and the final product is obtained by subsequent high temperature calcination (1373 K for 1 h). All solutions were prepared under ambient conditions using 18 MΩ cm de-ionized water (Millipore Milli-Q water purification system).
Characterization
The morphology and structure of the samples were studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-6360LV) and electron microscopy transmission (TEM, JEM-1011), high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEM-2100F) respectively. XRD patterns were recorded by Empyrean X-ray diffraction with Cu-Kα radiation. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted by a Thermo ESCALAB250 with a monochromatized Al Ka X-ray source (hm = 1486.6 eV).The chemical structures were analyzed by a Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTIR, NEXUS) with a scan range of 4000–400 cm−1. The nitrogen physisorption isotherms were measured at 77 K on an Automatic specific surface area and porosity analyzer (Empyrean, Micromeritics). The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area was calculated from nitrogen adsorption data in the relative pressure ranging from 0.01 to 0.30. Prior to measurement, the samples were activated in a vacuum at 573 K for 8 h.
Batch adsorption studies
UO2(NO3)2·6H2O was used as the sources of uranium ions to prepare aqueous stock uranyl solution. Different concentrations of test solutions were obtained by corresponding fixed ratio dilution and the pH of each solution was adjusted by adding small volumes of 0.1 mol/L HCl and/or NaOH solutions. For the adsorption kinetic study, the pH was adjusted to 2.86. Batch adsorption experiment was conducted by adding a certain amount of p-BN adsorbent to 100 ml of uranyl sample solution, and then the solution was shaken at room temperature (303.0 K) for 24.0 h to ensure adsorption equilibrium. To obtain sorption isotherms of uranyl on p-BN, the operating temperature was set to be 293.0, 303.0, and 313.0 K. After that, the solid was separated from aqueous solution via filtration through 0.22-μm polyether-sulfone membrane filters. Finally, the uranyl concentration in the supernatant was analyzed by spectrophotometry at 652 nm. The performance of the p-BN is depicted by uranyl removal percentage (η\% ) and the amount of uranyl adsorbed on the sorbent per unit weight (adsorption capacity, q). The adsorption capacity at any time t and equilibrium are indicated by qt and qe (mg g−1). The relevant parameters are calculated by the following formula:
η%=C0−CeC0×100%
(1)
qt=C0−CtmV
(2)
qe=C0−CemV
(3)
where C0(mg/L) is the initial concentration of solution, Ct and Ce are the concentration at time t and equilibrium. V (L) is the volume of solution, m (g) is the amount of adsorbent. All batch experiments were conducted in duplicates or triplicates in order to ensure the repeatability and data accuracy. The relative errors of the experimental data were less than 5%.
Results and discussion
Characterization of p-BN
The morphologies and structures of p-BN material were characterized by SEM, TEM and BET methods, the results were presented in Fig. 1. According to SEM image (Fig. 1a) and TEM image (Fig. 1b), it can be seen that the prepared p-BN constitute of irregular microrods, with a length ranging from a few micrometers to tens of micrometers and the diameter is on the micrometer level. Figure 1c shows the HRTEM image, a large number of visible nanopores are evenly distributed on the microrods, indicating that p-BN has a homogenous porous structure [31]. As depicted in Fig. 1d, long-range disorder lattice fringes are found on the edge of p-BN microrod, the results indicate the p-BN is of low crystallinity which is consistent with the value obtained from XRD pattern. The structural information of p-BN has been analyzed by XRD pattern in Fig. 1e. Two broad diffraction peaks at 25.6° and 42.5° have been observed, which can be indexed to the (002) and (100) planes of hexagonal BN (JCPDS card No. 34-0421), respectively [30].
Fig. 1
figure1
a SEM image of the p-BN. b TEM image of p-BN. c HRTEM image of p-BN. d HRTEM image of p-BN and lattice diffraction pattern (insert). e XRD pattern of p-BN
Also, N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm was measure to further identify the surface area and pore diameter distribution of p-BN. In Fig. 2 inset, a type I isotherm and an H4 type broad hysteresis loop are presented in measured isotherm, indicating the p-BN material is filling of both micro porosity and narrow slit-shaped mesopores [31]. Figure 2 shows the corresponding BJH pore-size distribution curve, the calculated pore volume is 0.299 cm3/g with an average pore diameter 2.82 nm. In addition, the BET specific surface area is 592.0 m2/g. The high specific surface area can provide more activated site and beneficial for adsorption.
Fig. 2
figure2
BET measurement of p-BN, inset: N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm and the corresponding BJH pore-size distribution curve
XRD and FTIR analysis for adsorbed p-BN
To further investigate the removal mechanism of uranyl on p-BN, more characterization experiments were performed. The XRD pattern is used to characterize the difference in the lattice structure of p-BN itself prior and after adsorption. FTIR is used to investigate the changes in the surface functional groups. In brief, 100 mL of 250 mg/L uranyl solution with initial pH of 2.86, 6.94 and 9.10 were treated with 0.1 g of p-BN absorbent. The absorbed p-BN was recovered by filtration and dried for characterization. As shown in Fig. 3a, for the sample of pH 6.94 and 9.10, the position and intensity of the diffraction peak were similar to that of the raw p-BN. In contrast, for the sample with the pH of 2.86, the results exhibited significantly different phenomena. The intensities of two characteristic diffraction peak of p-BN decreased evidently, indicating a decrease in the crystallinity of adsorbed p-BN. Besides, an unknown diffraction peak at ~ 11.5o appeared in the spectrum, meaning that new crystalline forms may be produced. The XRD analysis results can be verified with EDS analysis in Fig. S1(A-D). The elemental analysis shows that p-BN has adsorption activity only under the sample at pH 2.86 in Fig. S1(B). The unknown crystalline compound was then analyzed as a uranium precipitate crystal.
Fig. 3
figure3
XRD pattern (a) and FTIR spectra (b) of p-BN before and after adsorption with different solution pH value (2.86, 6.94, 9.10)
FTIR spectrum are depicted in Fig. 3b, the bands of –OH at ~ 3400 cm−1 and –NH2 at ~ 3250 cm−1 illustrates that as-prepared p-BN possesses –OH and –NH2 group [32], which can provide activated sites for the adsorption of metal ions [33]. Besides, corresponding to the sp2-bonded B–N and B–N–B bending vibration, two strong characteristic absorption bands were observed at ~ 1380 cm−1 and ~ 780 cm−1 respectively [34, 35]. Furthermore, after adsorption, the broad band ranges from 2200 to 3000 cm−1 and 1000 to 1600 cm−1 were consistent with amine and imine hydrohalide N–H+/N–H2+ stretching vibrations [36]. It is noteworthy that there is a clearly adsorption peak at ~ 910 cm−1 in the sample of pH 2.86, which is attributed to some uranium-containing component. As proved by subsequent batch adsorption experiment, the as-prepared p-BN contained a large amount of amino and hydroxyl groups and presented strong alkalinity and a certain buffering capacity.
HRTEM and energy spectrum analysis for adsorbed p-BN
In order to further confirm what changes have occurred in the microstructure of p-BN at pH 2.86, HRTEM images for absorbed p-BN were employed. The digital photos for both raw and adsorbed p-BN are showed in the inset of Fig. 4a, b, a white to yellow color change was appeared. In comparison of the HRTEM images Fig. 4a, b, a large number of flaky crystals are attached to the surface of p-BN microrods. The flaky crystals can be detached from p-BN (Fig. 4c) and it presents a completely different lattice fringes from p-BN (Fig. 4d). Energy spectrum analysis was then conducted to analyze the chemical composition of absorbed p-BN (Fig. S2) and detached flaky crystal only (Fig. 4e). Not surprisingly, from the analysis of the image (Fig. S2), the U element was successfully adsorbed on p-BN. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 4e, the composition of the plate crystal is mainly U (82.64 ± 0.70%, w/w) and O (17.36 ± 0.70%, w/w), and without B and N. This means that the flaky crystals are likely to be some kind of uranyl hydrolyzed precipitate. As we known, in the purification process of uranium, a chemical concentrate of uranium can be prepared by a precipitation method, through what the pH of an acidic uranium-containing solution adjusting by alkaline substance such as ammonia or NaOH [37]. Because of infrared results of a large number of amino/hydroxyl groups contained in as-prepared p-BN, the material was supposed to be strong alkalinity (proved by subsequent pH influence experiments). The addition of p-BN to a uranyl solution at pH 2.86 would create a chemical environment similar to that mentioned, resulting in some uranyl hydrolyzed precipitate.
Fig. 4
figure4
HRTEM image for p-BN before (a) and after absorption (b).The corresponding digital photos are also presented. c The crystalline object attached on the absorbed p-BN. d A clearer HRTEM for the crystalline object. e Energy spectrum analysis for the crystalline object, the selected area is detached from p-BN
XPS analysis for adsorbed p-BN
XPS spectra were also conducted to demonstrate the chemical states and their compositions of the absorbent before and after absorption. It can be seen that there are mainly three elements (B, N, O) detected in XPS spectra of total survey for p-BN (in Fig. 5a), in consistent with the EDS results in Fig. S1. As described before, U element can be successfully adsorbed on p-BN. Thus, after adsorption, at around of 100 eV, 390 eV and 760 eV, three new pairs of peaks were observed in Fig. 5a, which can be indexed to U5d, U4f and U4d spectrum [38]. Figure 5b shows high resolution U4f XPS spectrum of U element in adsorbed p-BN, the occurrence of double peaks 381.65 eV and 392.50 eV is due to the orbital spin splitting of the 4f layer electrons of uranium atoms, corresponding to U4f7/2 and U4f5/2 [38], respectively. Relative to the uranium metal, the photoelectron binding energy of the 4f layer electrons is a double peak of 377.3 eV and 388.0 eV. The higher electron binding energy means that uranium atoms adsorbed on p-BN are at a relatively high valence state, positive U(VI) state. Furthermore, the broad peaks at 381.65 eV and 392.50 eV can be divided into three pairs of peaks located at (308.94 eV and 391.73 eV), (381.54 eV and 392.33 eV), (382.12 eV and 392.90 eV), respectively. The split peaks can be attributed to the U atom in different states bound to the O atoms in uranyl hydrolyzed precipitate and other forms of uranyl hydrolysates. This indicates that in addition to the hydrolyzed precipitated crystals, uranium adsorbed on p-BN exists in other forms, which means that adsorption methods such as electrostatic adsorption may also exist.
Fig. 5
figure5
a XPS surveys for p-BN and adsorbed p-BN; b high resolution U4f XPS spectrum of U(VI) adsorbed p-BN and its fitted peak curves
Influence of pH and sorbent dosage
In order to evaluate the effect of the initial pH of the uranyl solution on the adsorption of uranium by p-BN, batch experiment was employed. Briefly, 0.10 g of p-BN adsorbent was added into 100 mL of 250 mg L−1 U(VI) solution with different initial pH. The results showed in Fig. 6a demonstrates that p-BN possess the best adsorption effect in uranyl solution at pH 2.86. A pH that is higher or lower will result in a decrease in adsorption. Unexpectedly, this phenomenon for the optimal pH at 2.86 is not in good agreement with similar studies (in which the optimal pH were always set to be 5–6) [39,40,41,42]. For what the variation of adsorption with pH values could not be explained by electrostatic interaction between protonated/deprotonated surface functional groups from the p-BN adsorbent and uranyl ions. To resolve this problem, the pH value of uranyl solution after adsorption was examined in Fig. 6a inset. The results show that the p-BN exhibits great alkalinity and a certain buffering capacity, can adjust the pH of the solution and maintain the pH near 9.0.
Fig. 6
figure6
a The effect of initial pH to the uranyl adsorption capacity (qe) and adsorption percentage at equilibrium. Inset: the pH of U-containing solution before and after adsorption. b Effect of p-BN dosage on the adsorption capacity (qe) and adsorption percentage of uranyl
As characterized in FTIR spectrum, the existence of a large number of amino/hydroxyl groups gives p-BN mentioned properties. However, although the final pH of adsorbed solution (expect the initial pH at 0.95 and 1.85) were nearly the same, the uranyl adsorption capacity and adsorption percentage at equilibrium are quite different with each other. These phenomena suggest that there may be a more complex mechanism for the adsorption of uranyl on p-BN. As characterized above, some uranyl hydrolyzed precipitate formed on the p-BN adsorbent. Here, we proposed a possible mechanism to try to resolve this phenomenon: the initial pH of 2.86, uranium exists in solution as ions UO22+ (monomer,as shown in Fig S3), and the surface of p-BN contains a large amount of amino and hydroxyl basic groups. At the beginning of the addition of p-BN, the hydrolysis of amino/hydroxyl on the surface rapidly enriches uranium still in the UO22+ ion form by electrostatic adsorption. This results in a higher concentration of hydroxyl groups and UO22+ on the surface of p-BN, thereby forming precipitated nucleus. Then the precipitated crystal nucleus continuously adsorbs uranyl ions in solution, and finally forms precipitated crystal particles. This mechanism would be carried out with a relatively high concentration of uranyl ions [43]. The too low initial pH exceeds the buffering capacity of p-BN, making it impossible to provide a sufficiently high concentration of hydroxyl groups for the growth of precipitated nuclei. Excessive pH value affects the initial ionic morphology of uranyl (Fig S3), causing impossible to form precipitated nuclei on the surface of the adsorbent. Figure 6b presents the effect of p-BN dosage on the adsorption capacity (qe) and adsorption percentage of uranyl. In practice, the initial pH of the uranium solution was adjusted to 2.86 after optimization, and then different masses of adsorbent were added into 100 mL 250 mg/L U(VI) solution. One can see that the adsorption capacity of uranyl is poor for the concentration of p-BN below 0.6 g/L, due to insufficient ability of a small amount of adsorbent to adjust the pH of the solution. On the other hand, the adsorption capacity decreases by excess adsorbent over 0.6 g/L. We also can see that the adsorption percentage of uranyl increases with the adsorption dosage at the beginning, and then decreases slightly after the excess. The reason for this phenomenon may be that a large amount of adsorbent produces too much precipitated nucleation sites, which limits the growth of crystal nuclei.
Adsorption kinetics and isotherm
Figure 7a presented the uptake of uranyl on p-BN as a function of contact time. One can see that the adsorptive quantity of uranyl increased quickly in the first 300 min, and the adsorption capacity can reach 242.5 mg/g. The variation of adsorption capacity with contact time can reflect adsorption kinetic models, analyzing the relationship between the structure of adsorbent and adsorption performance [31]. The adsorption process and consequence can also be predicted or verified. In the present work, pseudo-first-order model, pseudo-second-order model and intra-particle diffusion model were employed to fit the experimental data. The linearized forms of the three models are expressed by the equations as follows (4–6):
pseudo-first-order model:ln(qe−qt)=lnqe−k1×t
(4)
pseudo-second-order model:tqt=1k2×q2e+1qe×t
(5)
intra-particle diffusion model:qt=kdt1/2+I
(6)
where the k1 (min−1)and k2 (g mg−1 min−1) are the rate constant of the first and the second order adsorption. kd(g mg−1 min−1/2) is the rate constant of intra-particle diffusion, I is a parameter relate to the thickness of the boundary layer, the greater the boundary layer effect is, the higher the I will be. Figure 7b–d shows the fitting results by three kinetic models, the corresponding kinetic parameters are listed in Table 1.
Fig. 7
figure7
a Adsorption capacities and removal percentages of uranyl on p-BN with various contact times; the kinetics models for adsorption of uranyl on p-BN: b pseudo-first-order model; c pseudo-second-order model; d intra-particle diffusion model. Experimental condition: Initial pH at 2.86, C = 250 mg L−1, m = 0.1 g, V = 100 ml
Table 1 Adsorption kinetics models parameters
The results obtained from the analysis of experimental data indicated that the adsorption of uranyl on p-BN is best described by pseudo-first-order model. However, from the analysis results, the linear fitting coefficients of the three kinetic models are not high, and the data at the beginning of the adsorption is the main reason for the decline. These indicate that the adsorption mechanism of uranyl on p-BN is complicated, and it cannot be simply simulated by a single kinetic model. Notably, an unusual piecewise linear regressions observed in the intra-particle diffusion plot, three distinct regions are included in the adsorption attributed to three different factors. Combined with the proposed adsorption mechanism (surface adsorption and induced precipitation crystallization) we mentioned above, the first linear portion (Fig. 7d region I) represents the stage of formation of precipitated nuclei, this may be attributed to amino/hydroxyl active sites on the p-BN; The higher slope for the second linear portion (Fig. 7d region II) is probably due to the growth stage of the precipitated nucleus; and then the third linear portion (Fig. 7d region III) suggest a slow adsorption dependent on molecular diffusion of uranyl in p-BN micropores.
Adsorption isotherms, which describe the relation between the equilibrium concentration of adsorbate (Ce) and the adsorption capacity of adsorbent (qe), are important to analyze the adsorption process and to explore the adsorption mechanism [31]. Figure 8a presented the adsorption isotherms of uranyl on p-BN at different temperature (293 K, 303 K and 313 K). As temperature rise, adsorption capacity of adsorbent increases, which indicates clearly that high temperature is propitious to adsorption behavior. On the other hand, it is noteworthy that the adsorption capacity decreases in consistent with the equilibrium concentration of adsorbate (Ce) increases in Fig. 8b. This means that an excessively high concentration of uranyl solution reduces the adsorption capacity of p-BN. These phenomena can also be attributed to the favorable conditions for the formation of crystal precipitates. High temperature can reduce the supersaturation of the solution, which is not conducive to the formation of a large number of precipitated nuclei, while the effect of high concentration of uranyl solution is reversed. To further study the adsorption of uranyl on p-BN, two types of isotherm models: Langmuir and Freundlich models were adopted and results in Fig. 8. The linearized forms of the two models are expressed as follows (7–8):
Langmuir model:1qe=1KL×qm×1Ce+1qm
(7)
Freundlich model:lnqe=lnKF+1n×lnCe
(8)
where the qm (mg g−1) is the maximum adsorption capacity of the sorbent; KL is the Langmuir adsorption constant relate to the affinity of binding sites; KF and n are Freundlich constant, KF reflects the adsorption ability and n is non-linear factor relate to heterogeneous energy of adsorption surface. Figure 8c, d shows the fitting results by isotherm models, the corresponding parameters are listed in Table 2. Not surprisingly, unlike conventional sorbent systems, the main reason for the adsorption of uranium on p-BN is the formation and growth of uranyl hydrolyzed precipitated crystals. So, Both Langmuir and Freundlich models can not fit the experimental data well, and the related parameters appear chaotic and disordered.
Fig. 8
figure8
a Adsorption isotherms of U(VI) on p-BN at T = 293 K, 303 K and 313 K; b Effect of initial concentration of uranyl for equilibrium concentration of adsorbate (Ce) and the adsorption capacity of adsorbent (qe) in T = 293 K; equilibrium adsorption isotherms fitted by c Langmuir model; d Freundlich model; Experimental condition: Initial pH at 2.86, m = 60 mg, V = 100 ml
Table 2 Adsorption isotherm models parameters
Conclusions
This study focused on the adsorption of uranyl on p-BN. A variety of characterization methods (such as SEM, TEM, BET, FTIR, XPS and HRTEM) have been used to study p-BN prior and after adsorption of uranyl. The results demonstrated that the as-prepared p-BN retains a large amount of surface hydroxyl/amino groups, exhibiting strong alkalinity and a certain buffering capacity. At an optimized pH of 2.86, a large amount of uranyl hydrolyzed precipitated crystals is formed on the surface of p-BN and the maximum adsorption capacity can reach 413 mg g−1 at T = 303 K. Kinetic and isotherm studies have also shown that uranyl ions sorption on p-BN cannot be fitted by a single adsorption model such as electrostatic attraction or chemisorption, meaning that this adsorption behavior is a relatively complex process. Considering the above results, we proposed a possible mechanism that adsorption of uranyl on p-BN is a combination of surface adsorption and induced precipitation crystallization. We hope that this research will contribute to the purification and recovery of uranium from wastewaters.