<title>Development of an Experimental Routine for Electrochemical and Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy Composition Measurements of SmCl3 in LiCl-KCl Eutectic Salt Systems</title>
<author>Andrews; Phongikaroon</author>
<Affiliation>Virginia Commonwealth University , Department of Mechanical & Nuclear Engineering , Richmond , Virginia 23284</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2018.1551988</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00295450.2018.1551988</URL>
Abstract
Four different concentrations of SmCl3 in LiCl-KCl were tested using cyclic voltammetry to determine the diffusion coefficients of Sm(III) and Sm(II) found to be 8.59 × 10−6 ± 1.67 × 10−6 and 8.01 × 10−6 ± 0.98 × 10−6 cm2 s−1, respectively. Ten samples, in the form of salt ingots with SmCl3 concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 10.0 wt% were used for the creation of three laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) calibration models corresponding to 484.4-, 490.5-, and 546.7-nm peaks. Results show that the 490.5-nm peak model had the lowest limit of detection at 0.510 wt%, and all three models had similar root-mean-square errors of calibration values ranging from 0.470 to 0.498 wt%. Four validation samples were then used to test the diffusion and LIBS methods’ ability to estimate concentration. The results of both methods match well with the inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy–measured concentrations.
Keywords: Cyclic voltammetry；laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy；pyroprocessing；concentration estimation
I. INTRODUCTION
One possible method for the treatment of used nuclear fuel (UNF) is known as pyroprocessing technology. Pyroprocessing or pyrochemical technology uses a method of electrorefining UNF in molten chloride salts to recover U on a solid cathode and corecover Pu with U in a liquid Cd cathode.1–3 The keystone step within the pyroprocessing system is an electrorefining process where the U from the UNF is lowered into high-temperature (typically 773 K) molten LiCl-KCl eutectic salt and is then electrochemically dissolved into the salt bath. The U is then reduced onto a solid cathode to be removed. Studies done on the Mark-IV electrorefiner at the Idaho National Laboratory using UNF from the Experimental Breeder Reactor found that after electrorefining only a fraction of the original U (0.3 to 7.5 wt%) was retained in the molten LiCl-KCl, depending on the dissolution of Zr into the salt.4 Additionally, Li and coworkers showed that the electrorefiner current efficiencies—the ratio of U deposited to the theoretical maximum based on the time-integrated current—have reached the range 65% to 76% (Ref. 5).
During the electrorefining step, active species such as Gd, Sm, and Ce, which have standard reduction potentials more negative than that of U, will form soluble chlorides and accumulate in the electrorefiner salt.6 It is important to monitor the salt composition in order to prevent the system’s efficiency from being affected by an accumulation of these species. Currently, this electrorefining salt is being monitored through the use of inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy7 (ICP-MS). This process includes removing frozen salt samples and diluting them into an acid solution to be processed outside of the hot cell. This lag time between sampling and analysis, mostly due to hot cell removal, is nonideal and not strongly desirable from the nuclear safeguards perspective.
One method of a more time-efficient composition analysis, known as laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS), has been recently proposed. LIBS involves focusing a pulsed high-energy laser onto a sample, creating a plasma plume from the sample’s ablated surface. As this plasma cools, an elemental spectrum is generated from the elements returning to their ground state. This spectrum can be collected via fiber optics and analyzed to determine the composition of the sample.7
Several studies have been performed using cyclic voltammetry (CV) to calculate the diffusion coefficients of various elements, including U (Refs. 6, 8, 9, and 10), Ce (Refs. 9, 11, 12, and 13), Gd (Refs. 13 and 14), and Sm (Refs. 9, 15, 16, and 17). These diffusivities were calculated by using the peak current values versus the square root of the scan rate along with the Randles-Sevcik equation for soluble/soluble reactions or the Berzins-Delahay equation for soluble/insoluble reactions. Despite species being examined in multiple studies by different research teams, the calculated values can vary greatly from study to study. Through the use of the Randles-Sevcik or Berzins-Delahay equations depending on the nature of the reaction and a calibration system, the concentration of the species can be calculated.
Both of the later methods provide a motivation for this study to explore an experimental program that can possibly obtain multidata collections to improve and predict the electrorefining process. The goal of this project is to develop a novel experimental routine for using both CV and LIBS in parallel to calculate the elemental composition of surrogate salt, such as samarium chloride, in molten LiCl-KCl salts. Samarium chloride was chosen as a surrogate salt for several reasons. First is the likeness between the single electron transfer reaction of Sm(III) to Sm(II) and uranium’s U(IV) to U(III) reaction. Second, due to samarium’s reaction in the LiCl-KCl eutectic potential window being insoluble in nature there is no deposition on the working electrode, resulting in high repeatability for electrochemical tests. The results of both methods were compared with ICP-MS analysis to validate the capability of our proposed experimental procedures.
II. EXPERIMENTAL
II.A. Sample Preparation
Salt preparation was done using the standard procedure for molten salt systems reported previously.8,11,12,18 The electrochemical experiments were contained within a high-purity argon atmosphere glove box with oxygen and water concentrations maintained at less than 5 ppm. The experiments were run using a Biologic VSP-300 potentiostat and a modified ThermoScientific muffle furnace. The furnace used for molten salt experiments is shown in Fig. 1a.
Fig. 1. Experimental equipment: (a) modified muffle furnace and (b) laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy optics.
Before sample preparation began, the primary alumina crucible was cleaned ultrasonically in 2 vol % HNO3 acid for 1 h and then baked for 24 h at 773 K to remove any impurities that may contaminate samples. Samples were created by mixing proper ratios of lithium chloride (LiCl, 99.95%) and potassium chloride (KCl, 99.95%) from Alfa Aesar into an aluminum oxide crucible to form LiCl-KCl (58.2:41.8 mol %) eutectic salt. This crucible was then lowered into an aluminum oxide secondary crucible. The crucibles and salt mixture were placed into a furnace to be dried at approximately 523 K for a minimum of 5 h to remove any moisture in the salt. After the drying process, the furnace temperature was raised to 773 K to allow the salt to melt and fully mix at an incremental rate of 5 K min-1 (this is to prevent any thermal shock within the system). After the melting period had come to completion, the salt was allowed to cool to room temperature. Then, specific amounts of samarium chloride (SmCl3, 99.9%) were added to the LiCl-KCl salt to form the various sample compositions. Following the addition of SmCl3, the salt samples underwent the same drying and melting processes as mentioned previously.
After this process of sample preparation, the samples underwent electrochemical testing in the furnace. For LIBS testing, salt ingots were drawn from the molten salt in the crucible. A small portion of these salt ingots was taken to be used for ICP-MS validation. These ICP-MS samples were diluted in 45 mL of 2 vol % HNO3 for 24 h to form a stock solution. Then small amounts of the stock solution, ranging from 6 to 10 µL depending on the prepared concentration, were added to 10 mL of 2 vol % HNO3 to form the samples to be analyzed by the ICP-MS. A total of 18 samples were used for various portions of this study; detailed sample information and sample names to be referenced throughout this study are shown in Table I. The ICP-MS–measured concentrations match well with prepared sample concentrations with nearly all samples being within 0.30 wt% of their expected concentration.
TABLE I Sample Information
II.B. Electrochemical Setup
For the electrochemical testing, the SmCl3-LiCl-KCl sample remained in the alumina crucible, as well as the aluminum oxide secondary crucible, located at the bottom of the furnace. A thermocouple, oriented so that the tip is submerged into the mixture, was used to monitor the salt temperature. Silver-silver chloride (1 mol % Ag/AgCl) was used as the reference electrode throughout the measurements. This reference electrode was prepared by contacting a 1-mm Ag wire to LiCl-KCl-1 mol % AgCl within a 7-mm diameter Pyrex tube. This custom-made Pyrex tube was designed so that the thickness at the tip is thin enough to permit ionic conduction. A tungsten rod (2-mm diameter) was used as the working electrode and a glassy carbon rod (3-mm diameter) was used as the counter electrode. The submerged depth of the electrodes was measured for each test in order to calculate the contact surface area. This experimental setup is depicted in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Furnace schematic for electrochemical experiments and salt preparation.
The electrochemical method chosen for these experiments was CV due to the method’s robustness. During the forward and reverse CV scans, oxidation and reduction reactions occur allowing the entire redox reaction to be recorded. When the data are viewed as a current-versus-potential plot, these reactions are represented as peaks due to the sudden increase in current from electron transfer. Many elemental characteristics can be found using the reaction peak information, including diffusion, apparent standard potential, and activation energy.6,8–17
II.C. LIBS Setup
For the LIBS system, the solid salt sample technique was similar to the study reported by Williams and coworkers.7 In their study, samples were placed in jars, filled with argon, and removed from the glove box for analysis. While working outside of the glove box made optic optimization easier, the trade-off was that dust collection in the jars decreased the emission signal over the course of testing.7 To overcome this issue, the LIBS setup in this study was built inside the glove box, as seen in Fig. 1b. This modification allowed the optics to be unaffected by dust buildup and helped to save time between salt sampling and testing. For each LIBS sample, a Pyrex tube and syringe were used to draw the molten salt from the crucible into the tube where it could be removed from the heating source to freeze. After the salts solidified, they were removed from the Pyrex tube leaving cylindrical salt ingots with an outer diameter of 4 mm to be used in the LIBS system. A laser pulse from a Quantel Q-smart 450 Nd:YAG laser was fired through a quartz window into the glove box, then it was directed and focused onto the salt sample surface. The pulse resulted in a plasma plume; the light emissions from the plasma were collected at 90 deg from the incident laser pulse by optics and focused onto a fiber optic cable to route the light out of the glove box to an Andor Mechelle spectrometer and Andor iStar intensified charged couple device (ICCD) camera for analysis. The schematic of the LIBS setup is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Schematic for LIBS analysis.
III. EXPERIMENTAL PROGRAM AND RESULTS
III.A. Determination of Electrochemical Properties
Samarium chloride was added to LiCl-KCl eutectic salts in concentrations of 1.0, 2.5, 5.0, and 10.0 wt%. The testing of SmCl3-LiCl-KCl began with CV being applied at several scan rates ranging from 50 to 200 mV s−1 at temperatures of 723, 748, 773, and 798 K. The voltage drop due to the solution resistance of the system was compensated for during electrochemical testing. These sample concentrations were chosen to create a concentration window from 1.0 to 10.0 wt% for the diffusion values to be used to electrochemically determine concentration in the second phase of this project.
The measured CV curves of samples 1.0-DD and 10.0-DD at 773 K are shown in Fig. 4. As seen in Fig. 4, the peaks grow with an increase in scan rate; however, they remain at the same potential validating the reversible nature of the system. Additionally, it can be noticed that the magnitudes of the peaks increase with concentration, however the rate the peaks change in relation to the scan rate remains similar.
Fig. 4. Cyclic voltammograms at 773 K and scan rates ranging from 50 to 200 mV s−1: (a) 1.0-DD (S = 1.35 cm2, Rs = 0.198 Ω) and (b) 10.0-DD (S = 1.23 cm2, Rs = 0.209 Ω).
The diffusion coefficient, D (cm2 s−1), can be found by relating the peak currents, ip (A), and the square root of the scan rate, ν−−√ (V s−1/2), through the Randles-Sevcik equation:
ipν√=0.4463nFACnFDRT−−−−√,(1)
where
n =
number of transfer electrons
F =
Faraday constant (C mol−1)
A =
cathode contact surface area (cm2)
C =
molar concentration (mol cm−3)
R =
universal gas constant (J mol−1 K−1)
T =
temperature (K) (Ref. 6).
The diffusion coefficient corresponding to Sm(III) or Sm(II) can be calculated by using the cathodic peak current or the anodic peak current, respectively. Due to the soluble/soluble nature of the Sm reaction, it can be assumed that all of the Sm is reduced on the reverse scan and all of the Sm is oxidized on the forward scan. This allows the same calculated C value to be used in the calculation of both diffusion coefficients. The linear relationship between the peak currents and the square root of the scan rate is shown in Fig. 5. The calculated Sm(III) and Sm(II) diffusion values are shown in Figs. 6a and 6b, respectively.
Fig. 5. (a) Anodic and (b) cathodic peak current versus the square root of scan rate for all diffusion determination samples at 773 K (see Table I for sample concentrations).
Fig. 6. Diffusion values of SmCl3 at various temperatures and concentrations: (a) Sm(III) and (b) Sm(II) (see Table I for sample concentrations).
The diffusivities increase with temperature and show no clear trend with change in concentration. The diffusivity values found in this study agree moderately well, within the same order of magnitude to those reported by Cordoba and Caravaca at temperatures from 673 to 873 K (Ref. 15). Table II shows a comparison of calculated Sm(III) diffusion values and those reported by different researchers.12–14 Tabulated Sm(II) diffusion values are shown in Table III. Based on these preliminary experiment results, the average Sm(III) and Sm(II) diffusion values were used for concentration estimation in Sec. III.C. The Sm(III) and Sm(II) diffusion coefficients were calculated to be 8.59 × 10−6 ± 1.67 × 10−6 and 8.01 × 10−6 ± 0.98 × 10−6 cm2 s−1, respectively.
TABLE II Calculated Sm(III) Diffusivity Values
TABLE III Calculated Sm(II) Diffusivity Values
III.B. Determination of LIBS Calibration Line
In a similar manner to the electrochemical experiments used to determine the diffusion values for SmCl3, several SmCl3-LiCl-KCl samples were made to be used to form a calibration model which related peak intensity or area to SmCl3 concentration for later LIBS testing. The concentrations of these salts ranged from 0.5 to 10.0 wt% SmCl3 (listed in Table I).
Ten samples were made to provide a better sample distribution to be used for the calibration model determined using simple linear regression. Each sample was placed into a sample holder and lased to collect data. Each sample was pulsed 50 times per repetition, for ten repetitions to form an accumulate spectra. Between each repetition the sample was translated along the salt ingot’s axial axis so that a new surface could be used for each repetition. Additionally, by firing along the axial axis of the salt ingot, any inconsistencies in SmCl3 concentration due to stratification during freezing or general inhomogeneity of the drawn salt could be accounted for in the variation between repetitions.
The settings for the ICCD camera connected to the spectrometer and the laser energy were determined by varying the gate width, gate delay, and laser energy individually, and comparing the signal-to-background ratios (SBRs) as well as the variance in the spectra signal. The optimized settings, which maximized the SBR and minimized the variance, were found to be a gate delay of 14 µs, a gate width of 8 µs, and a laser energy of 13 ± 2 mJ.
Due to the variation in the location of the plasma point on the salt ingot between repetitions and the variation in laser energy between shots, the percentage of the relative standard deviation (RSD) between repetitions can vary greatly. To correct this variation, the observed spectra were normalized to the mean of the larger wavelength range of the spectra; this was done by dividing each spectrum pointwise by the average peak intensity from 600 to 811 nm. This upper wavelength range includes peaks resulting from Li and K, which vary little between samples and served as the best normalization method. Figure 7a shows the variation between repetitions for sample 2.0-LC near the 484.8-nm Sm I peak before normalization, whereas Fig. 7b shows the peak variation post normalization. This normalization scheme reduced the percentage of RSD by an average of 36% over the entire spectrum.
Fig. 7. Variation in the 484.8-nm Sm I peak for the sample 2.0-LC (a) before normalization and (b) after normalization.
The normalized spectra for sample 7.0-LC is shown in Fig. 8. As shown in Fig. 8, the Li and K peaks dominate the spectra, however in the wavelength range of 400 to 600 nm there are theoretically 298 Sm lines according to the National Institute of Standards and Technology Atomic Spectra Database.19 This is the cause of what looks to be high background levels in this region. To better identify Sm peaks in the regions for the samples tested, a blank sample only containing LiCl-KCl was tested in the same manner as the other samples for the spectra to be compared. Based on this, several peaks were identified and investigated to choose which peaks would be best suited to form the calibration model. The investigated peaks along with their corresponding ion state, relative intensity (RI), SBR, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and their root-mean-square error (RMSE) relative to their mean intensity are shown in Table IV. It was ideal to maximize the peak intensities, SBR, and SNR; however, many of the peaks with greater intensities are actually the aggregate of several peaks within a small wavelength range. The echelle-type spectrometer used in this study had an intermediate resolution and could not separate peaks in such a small vicinity, so these peaks were not used. Another parameter of interest was RMSE as it is an indicator of a good linear fit, which is desirable for a strong calibration line. Based on these parameters, three peaks were chosen: 484.8 nm (Sm I), 490.5 nm (Sm I), and 546.7 nm (Sm I).
TABLE IV Peak Selection Parameters
Fig. 8. Normalized spectra for sample 7.0-LC.
The background-subtracted area and intensity of these peaks were calculated from the normalized spectra for each sample. Then using these data points, along with the ICP-MS–identified concentrations of the samples from Table I, a simple linear regression was performed to create a model. The area models had a larger RMSE and were left out of the final models. The calibration line for the 484.8-nm peak intensities are shown in Fig. 9 along with 95% confidence and prediction intervals. The RMSE was used as a measurement of the goodness of the fit of the calibration lines, which can be expressed as
RMSE=∑(yi−yˆi)2n−1−−−−−−−−√,(2)
Fig. 9. Calibration line for the normalized 484.8-nm Sm I peak intensity.
where
yi =
intensity of the data point
yˆi =
regression line–predicted intensity for that data point
n =
number of data points.
The RMSE value is in units of the y-axis, and a value of zero indicates a perfect fit. The RMSE for the 484.8-, 490.5-, and 546.7-nm peaks were found to be 0.164, 0.184, and 0.142, respectively (y-axis scaled 0 to 3). The limits of detection (LOD) were also calculated for each calibration line using
LOD=3σm,(3)
where σ is the standard deviation of the repetitions, and m is the slope of the regression line. The LOD is a representation of the lowest sample concentration that can be calculated with 33% confidence. A calibration model with a low LOD is preferable. The calculated LOD for the three peaks can be seen in Table V. The lowest LOD belongs to the 490.5-nm model at 0.501 wt%; however, this is above the concentration of the lowest sample. The significance of this is that while 0.5-LC was able to be detected, if this was an unknown sample being identified it would not be able to be identified with confidence greater than 33%. While a lower LOD is ideal, this value can be used as the lower end of the concentration window for later experiments using the model for concentration determination.
TABLE V Regression Data for Peak Intensity Calibration Models
To estimate the error of the calibration models, the root-mean-square error of calibration (RMSEC) was calculated using
RMSEC=∑xi,LIBS−xi,ICP−MS2n,(4)
where xi,LIBS is the concentration predicted by the calibration model, and xi,ICP-MS is the concentration calculated by the ICP-MS, taken in this case to be the actual concentration. The RMSEC values for each peak are shown in Table V. These RMSEC values are between 0.470 and 0.498 wt%; given the sample concentration range from 0.5 to 10.0 wt% these values are moderate. These values could be minimized through further data collection as root-mean-square indicators of error decrease with sample size, as seen in Eq. (4).
To examine how well a calibration model might predict an unknown sample, a leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) analysis was completed. The LOOCV analysis systematically leaves one data point out of the regression calculation. This model is then used to calculate the concentration of the data point left out. This is repeated n number of times, meaning the concentration corresponding to each individual data point is estimated by the model generated without that point. Using these predicted values, a root-mean-square of cross-validation (RMSECV) can be calculated using Eq. (4), where xi,LIBS is the estimate of the concentration when that data point is absent from the regression model. The RMSECV for each peak’s model is shown in Table V. These values are slightly larger than the RMSEC values; however, if this concentration model was applied to the electrorefiner in a continuous sample and measurement system, a deviation in concentration measurements of larger than the RMSECV values would be considered as an inherent change in the salt system. More sample measurements could help to decrease these RMSECV values, which would increase the accuracy of the model.
III.C. Concentration Prediction Using Diffusivity
The concentration prediction portion of this study, used to validate the proposed methods, was performed on four new samples: 1.0-CD, 3.0-CD, 6.5-CD, and 8.0-CD. These validation samples were prepared such that the entire concentration range fell within the same range as the preliminary experiments for both electrochemical and LIBS experiments. These samples underwent CV at 773 K at scan rates ranging from 150 to 250 mV s−1. The scan rate for the concentration determination experiments was increased from the preliminary experiments to decrease the data collection time. The CV of samples 3.0-CD and 8.0-CD are shown in Figs. 10a and 10b, respectively. The cathodic and anodic peaks of each CV were recorded and the slope of the square root of the scan rate versus the peak currents was calculated. The electrodes were then removed and the cathode electrode’s contact surface area was measured for calculations. Then Eq. (1) was used to solve for concentration by using the slope of the peak currents and the diffusion values calculated from the preliminary experiments. Salt ingots were then formed from the molten sample (this is the same procedure discussed in Sec. II.C) to be tested via LIBS. In addition, a portion of this salt sample was separated to be used for ICP-MS analysis. The experimental program for the concentration determination experiments is shown in Table VI.
Fig. 10. Cyclic voltammograms at 773 K and scan rates ranging from 150 to 250 mV s−1: (a) 3.0-CD (S = 0.96 cm2, Rs = 0.209 Ω) and (b) 8.0-CD (S = 0.66 cm2, Rs = 0.229 Ω).
III.D. Concentration Prediction Using LIBS
Following the electrochemical concentration determination, the salt ingots made were laser-induced to produce a plasma and the emissions were collected via a fiber optic cable as discussed in Sec. II.C. The same experimental scheme described in Sec. III.B was used. After data collection, these spectra were normalized and the intensities of the 484.4-, 490.5-, and 546.7-nm peaks were recorded. These peak intensities were then used with their respective models, described in Table V, to calculate the predicted concentrations of the samples.
IV. DISCUSSION
The concentrations of samples 1.0-CD, 3.0-CD, 6.5-CD, and 8.0-CD were calculated with both the Sm(III) and Sm(II) diffusivities, along with Eq. (1) in an attempt to validate the proposed method. The error associated with using the average diffusivities calculated in Sec. III.A was propagated through the calculation. This provided a standard error for the calculated concentrations. Additionally, using both Sm(III) and Sm(II) diffusivities for the calculation provided two calculated concentration values, which were then averaged. The SmCl3 concentrations calculated using the diffusion method are shown in Table VII.
TABLE VI Experimental Program for Concentration Determination
TABLE VII Comparison of Calculated Concentration Values
The concentrations were then calculated using the three LIBS calibration models from Sec. III.B. Each sample was tested for a total of ten repetitions, providing ten individual calculated concentration values per calibration model. The results of all three models were then averaged and reported in Table VII, along with the standard error associated with these measurements. The concentrations of the samples calculated with the ICP-MS analysis are also shown in Table VII. These ICP-MS values are treated as a benchmark for the other two methods, since ICP-MS is the method currently used for analyzing electrorefiner salt. Figure 11 shows a square plot of ICP-MS concentration versus the concentration estimates of the models.
Fig. 11. Estimated concentration versus ICP-MS–measured concentration.
The concentration window used for this experiment was based on the typical composition of electrorefiner salt reported by Phongikaroon and Simpson.20 This salt composition is shown in Table VIII. The concentration of SmCl3 expected is 0.99 wt%, aligning with sample 1.0-CD, which was measured to be 1.04 wt% by the ICP-MS. The diffusion and LIBS models estimated the concentration of 1.0-CD to be 0.91 ± 0.07 and 1.04 ± 0.30 wt%, respectively. Additionally, SmCl3 was used in this study as a surrogate material for UCl3, which has an expected concentration of roughly 3.0 wt% according to Phongikaroon and Simpson.20 The system in this study was able to estimate concentrations in the window of 1.0 to 10.0 wt% within close proximity of the ICP-MS–measured values. This serves as validation that a version of this system, when further refined, could be applicable to the electrorefiner system.
TABLE VIII Reported Composition of Electrorefiner Salt*
The results of the concentration calculations fit well with the measured ICP-MS concentration values. The diffusion method results are dependent on the working electrode surface area measurement. This measurement is done by hand, using calipers to estimate the electrode depth. This technique adds additional human error to these calculations. Due to these trends, despite the average diffusion-calculated concentration being similar to the ICP-MS values, this current method would not be recommended as a sole method for electrochemical concentration estimation without a more precise surface area measurement method. Another method which may be suitable for electrochemically estimating concentration would be the application of an electrode withdrawal system. This method has been explored by several researchers, including Tylka and coworkers, Rappleye and his team, Castrillejo  et al., and Iizuka.10,13,17,21,22 This method varies the electrode depth while running CV; the change in the cathodic current peaks versus electrode depth is linear and changes with concentration. Thus, the slope of the peak current versus electrode depth provides a signal which can be used to estimate the concentration. The benefit of this method is that by varying the electrode depth by a known value, the error associated with measuring the electrode depth by hand can be negated.10,13,21,22 This method can be combined with the diffusion method in this paper to provide two separate concentration estimates while removing any error associated with measuring the electrode depth.
The LIBS model provides another adequate estimation of the SmCl3 concentration in the salt. The standard error values associated with this measurement are on the same magnitude as the RMSECV values reported in Sec. III.B, as expected. These values could be decreased in several ways before final implementation to the electrorefiner. The first way of decreasing the error would be to increase the sample size used for the calibration model and the number of repetitions used for concentration estimation. Despite this proposed plan for increasing the precision of LIBS routine, another unavoidable error is due to variation in the laser energy, which is proportional to the peak intensity.
For future LIBS work, the use of a partial-least-squares (PLS) model is recommended. This experiment utilized a simple least-squares linear regression along with an accumulate spectrum generated from 50 shots; however, future work could utilize each spectrum generated by individual shots to increase the sample population used in the models by a significant amount. These data could then be used along with the PLS_toolbox from Eigenvector, which has been shown by Williams and Phongikaroon to provide a stronger model based on the RMSE, RMSEC, and RMSECV indicators.7,23
In addition, the use of solidified salt has several benefits. Previous research on utilizing LIBS on liquidus molten salt has shown it to have many issues including the formation of an oxide layer on the surface of the salt and the laser pulse generating splashing which degrades the signal and damages optics.24,25 This splashing would also render the use of an electrochemical method for concentration estimation useless because the surface area of the working electrode would change rapidly due to the wake in the salt crucible. Another method investigated was the use of a molten salt aerosol system for LIBS (Refs. 23 and 26). This method was shown to be able to estimate the concentration of salt species successfully with 657-ppm LOD. However, there was a decrease in the concentration of the salt between the collision nebulizer located in the salt crucible and the LIBS sampler. Additionally, the aerosol system requires extensive cleaning, whereas the salt ingot method presented in this paper requires minimal cleaning. The aerosol method requires filter changing and scraping of frozen salt off various parts of the system. The salt ingot method in this study only requires collection of salt dust generated from the plasma plume. Furthermore, this solid LIBS setup was operated at a lower energy than that reported by Williams et al., resulting in less dust generation.7 Dust collection in this study was easily achieved using parafilm and for future applications could be achieved by enclosing the sampling area and applying a vacuum which would pass through an inline HEPA filter to collect possible actinide dust formation.
V. CONCLUSION
Four samples were tested using CV to gather information on the diffusion coefficients of SmCl3 in molten LiCl-KCl eutectic salt. By using the cathodic and anodic peaks at various scan rates, the Sm(III) and Sm(II) diffusivities were calculated. These diffusion values showed no direct trend with concentration. The mean Sm(III) and Sm(II) diffusivities were calculated to be 8.59 × 10−6 ± 1.67 × 10−6 and 8.01 × 10−6 ± 0.98 × 10−6 cm2 s−1, respectively. These values were further used with the CV current peaks of four test samples to calculate the concentration of SmCl3 in the salt.
At the same time, ten separate samples, with SmCl3 concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 10.0 wt%, were prepared and melted to be used for the creation of a LIBS calibration model. Salt ingots were created routinely and shot for ten repetitions (50 shots each with translation along the ingot’s axial direction to a fresh surface between repetitions). The gathered spectra were normalized to the upper wavelength range 600 to 811 nm to account for variations between repetitions. Then the 484.4-, 490.5-, and 546.7-nm peaks were analyzed, and three individual calibration models were made from the peak intensities.
Each calibration model was analyzed based on the RMSE and LOD. The 490.5-nm peak model had the lowest LOD at 0.510 wt%; however, all three models had similar LOD values. The validity of each calibration model was then tested by comparing predicted concentration values to those measured by the ICP-MS; this validity test was measured by the RMSEC value. All three models had similar RMSEC values ranging from 0.470 to 0.498 wt%. Last, a LOOCV analysis was performed to gather information on how well the models would estimate an unknown sample. This analysis was measured by the RMSECV value. All three models had agreeable values ranging from 0.587 to 0.615 wt% showing no major advantage of using one model over the other.
Finally, four new validation samples were made and used to test the diffusion and LIBS methods’ ability to estimate concentration. These four samples ranged in concentration from 1.0 to 8.0 wt% to be within the concentration analysis windows established for both methods. The results match well with the ICP-MS–measured concentrations (see Fig. 11). The results show that both methods were able to adequately estimate the sample concentration. To increase the accuracy of the diffusion method it is recommended to investigate more accurate surface area measurements. The LIBS method error could be reduced through increasing the sample population used for the calibration and by investigating more robust regression models.
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported under an Integrated University Program Graduate Fellowship. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Nuclear Energy.
