<title>Separation and quantification of 90Sr from ion-exchange resin radioactive waste: methods and techniques of analysis</title>
<author>Aurelia Magdalena Dianu; Relu Ion Dobrin</author>
<Affiliation> Radioactive Waste Treatment and Conditionig Plant, Institute for Nuclear Research, Pitesti , 1 Campului Str., Mioveni , Arges 115400 , Romania ; Radiation Protection, Environmental Protection and Civil Protection, Institute for Nuclear Research, Pitesti , 1 Campului Str., Mioveni , Arges 115400 , Romania</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiochimica Acta</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Walter de Gruyter GmbH</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1515/ract-2019-3213</DOI>
<URL>http://sci-hub.ren/10.1515/ract-2019-3213</URL>
Abstract:
Four methods for 90Sr separation from spent ionexchange resin samples were carried out, offering a useful
methodology to achieve interferences free 90Sr fractions. The four methods consist in resin sample decomposition, pre-treatment and selective separation of 90Sr by using: (a) a single chromatographic extraction process, (b) double chromatographic extraction, (c) a single chromatographic extraction process followed in sequence by two precipitations, and (d) ion-exchange chromatography, followed by
extraction chromatography and precipitation. Mineralization by microwave acid digestion and the four 90Sr separation methods thoroughly presented are available. Data
processing methods (adjustable modified efficiency tracing – a new improved approach for the efficiency tracing LSC technique, non-linear regression and α-β discrimination) to obtain the activities values of α, β-γ, pure β emitters and the evaluation of chemical recovery yield of strontium were presented. A discussion about activity assessment in 90Sr purified fractions, providing a convincing argument to support the accuracy of the 90Sr separation methods, is also offered.
Keywords: 90Sr separation；spent ion-exchange resin；microwave acid digestion； adjustable modified efficiency；tracing.
1 Introduction
The 90Sr radioactive isotope is not a naturally occurring radionuclide and it exists because of human activities.
The behavior of 90Sr in various media such as the atmosphere, soil, water, plants and human body, transforms
it in a potential long-term hazard to the environment and people if it is not properly disposed. Strontium typically exists in a soluble form therefore it is less chemically bound on soil than many other radionuclides and
it is readily transported deep into soils by precipitation and groundwater. This means that strontium is available for plants root uptake, which represents the main route by which it gets into the food chain [1]. 90Sr is readily absorbed in the human body by inhalation and ingestion, and it is firmly fixed in the skeleton due to the chemical similarity to calcium. The entry principal routes of 90Sr into the human body are through both contaminated food (mainly agricultural crops) and milk from animals that are fed with contaminated plants [1].
The 90Sr radioisotope is a pure β emitter (Emax = 546 keV) with a half-life of about 29 years [1]. 90Sr can be detected by liquid scintillation counting (LSC) technique using various methods such as: (a) dual label DPM (DL-DPM) [2]; (b) full spectrum DPM (FS-DPM) [2, 3]; (c) efficiency tracing with 14C (ET) [2, 4]; (d) CIEMAT/NIST efficiency tracing [4].
LSC technique requires a chemical separation of 90Sr from other interfering radionuclides before determining its activity concentration. There are different methods of radiostrontium separation based on precipitation/ co-precipitation, liquid-liquid extraction, ion-exchange chromatography, extraction chromatography and combination of two or more of these methods. Extraction
chromatographic procedure presents many advantages compared to solvent extraction and ion-exchange, such as: a good contact of the reagent and fast exchange kinetics, a better effective separation, less reagents and chemicals, less hazardous waste [5].
There are a significant number of articles using Sr Resin columns for radiostrontium separation from various matrices such as: biological samples (water, soil, sediment, grass, milk, bone, and urine), nuclear power plant
(NPP) samples (air filter, effluent, concentrate, spent ionexchange resins) [5].
There is apparently no detailed description of a technique for mineralization and separation of 90Sr from NPP
spent ion-exchange resin employing the microwave acid digestion process followed by using Sr Resin columns,taking count of the high activity ratios between 90Sr and
interfering emitters.
The spent resin waste streams are produced during routine operations and maintenance activities at PHWRCANDU-6 Canadian type reactors of Romanian Cernavoda
Nuclear Power Plant [6]. The principal types of ion-exchange resin waste are produced by: primary heat transport purification system, fueling-machine purification system, spent
fuel cooling pool purification system, moderator purification system, end shield cooling system, liquid zone control
system, heavy water clean-up system [7].
The ion-exchange resins used in purification systems at Cernavoda NPP consist of a cross-linked resin matrix produced by co-polymerizing styrene with divinylbenzene, containing sulfonic acid functional group (for
strong acid cation resin, Amberlite™ IRN-77) and quaternary ammonium functional group (for strong base anion
resin, Amberlite™ IRN-78). Also, Amberlite™ IRN-150 (anominal 1:1 chemical equivalent mixture of IRN-77 and IRN-78), and Amberlite™ IRN-154 (a similar mixture of acid and base resins, but with Li+ substituting for approximately 75 % of H+ on the strong acid cation-exchange resin) are used [7].
The spent resin waste, transferred from Cernavoda NPP and used in this study for separation and quantification of 90Sr, was sampled from a spent ion-exchange
resin drum coming from the sieves of both moderator and primary heat transport purification systems.
The microwave digestion process was employed in order to transfer the 90Sr radionuclide into solution and thus the 90Sr separation methods could be applied. This technique was chosen to reduce the digestion time and to increase the oxidation efficiency, comparative to conventional heating [8]. Another advantage of using microwave
digestion is the sample throughput of up to eight samples each run comparative to one sample each run for combustion bomb or oxygen flask techniques [9]. These benefits
come along with using high digestion temperatures and pressures. A 90 min operational procedure was necessary to achieve a complete digestion, compared to 10–20 h of catalytic wet oxidation [10], and more than 99 % of strontium dissolution efficiency was achieved with this microwave digestion technique.
Four different methodologies for 90Sr separation were achieved: (1) a single Sr-selective resin column, single separation, (2) two consecutive Sr-selective resin columns, double separation, (3) a single Sr-selective resin column followed in sequence by two precipitations, and (4) ion-exchange chromatography, followed by extraction chromatography and precipitation. The (2) and (4) experiments were performed during a 2 days period.
A reverse separation process, compared to literature data [5], was used by performing the precipitation operations after the extraction chromatography (for the third
and fourth separation procedures). Thus, a minimum Sr resin quantity was used to reduce the working time and high reagents consumptions and to avoid the resin saturation by the presence of stable Sr.
High strontium recovery yields of 90 %–95 % were achieved for all four separation methods, compared to 60 %–90 % for other techniques used for strontium purification from the same type of radioactive waste [10, 11].
Data processing methods (adjustable modified efficiency tracing – a new approach for ET technique – and
non-linear regression) were developed to obtain the 90Sr activities values and the counting efficiencies.
The data presented in this article revealed the conditions under which the interferences free 90Sr separation
could be achieved.
2 Experimental
2.1 Materials
A Berghof™ Speedwave® four microwave acid digestion system was used to decompose the spent resin samples. A 3100 Tri-Carb® PerkinElmer model liquid scintillation analyzer was used to measure 90Sr and α-β activity.
A high purity germanium, HPGe, detector (EG&G Ortec,USA) was used for estimating the γ emitting radionuclides activity present in samples. A Berghof™ iCAP 6500 series inductively coupled plasma-optical emission (ICP-OE) spectrometer was used for the stable strontium recovery measurements.
A 0.63 g amount of Eichrom® Sr Resin (for extraction chromatography) in pre-packed 2  mL column, 100–150 μm particle size, and an 1.44 g amount of Bio-Rad AG® (for ion-exchange chromatography) 1 × 8 anion exchange resin (100–200 mesh particle size, Cl− form; total capacity of 1.2 meq mL−1 resin bed) were used for strontium separation. Ultima Gold® AB scintillation cocktail was used for
LSC measurements.
MN 640n medium filtering paper, with a 27 s filtration time, 0.2  mm thickness, retention range greater than 4 μm, suitable for gravimetric analysis, quantitative analysis of residue and purification processes, was used for filtration operations.
All the others used chemicals were analytical grade reagents.
Figure 1: The 90Sr separation and quantification experiment concept.
2.2 Analysis methods
The experiment (depicted in Figure 1) consists in samples preparation, 90Sr separation and data interpretation.
A two-stages study was carried out: (a) testing the four methods to separate the 90Sr radionuclide and (b) due to mineralization system limitation, repeating the experiment for a double activity of the samples, by selecting two
of the four 90Sr separation methods: the single Sr-selective resin column followed in sequence by two precipitations, and the ion-exchange chromatography, followed by
extraction chromatography and precipitation.
2.2.1 Mineralization of spent ion-exchange resin matrix
by microwave acid digestion A total of 2.4 g spent ion-exchange resin was sampled and divided into 12 0.2 g aliquots (marked as S1, S2…S12)and placed into the digestion vessels. Four 0.2 g aliquots (S9…S12) were used to measure α-β global activity (after mineralization process) and the other eight aliquots(S1…S8) were used in 90Sr separation processes, i. e. duplicates for each of the four 90Sr separation methods.
2.5 mg/aliquot of Sr2+ (0.25 mL of a 10 mg mL−1 solution prepared by dissolving Sr(NO3)2 in 2 % HNO3 solution)were added to the (S1…S8) samples as a stable yield tracer,and 8 mL of concentrated reagents (HNO3: H2O2 = 3:1) were used for each of the 12 aliquots as a digestion mixture.
Because of small quantities of organic matter that can be processed by the mineralization system, eight more 0.2 g aliquots of spent resin (marked as S13…S20) were digested in order to verify the efficiency of the separationmethods on higher β-γ interferences activity in samples.
1.25 mg/aliquot of Sr2+ (0.25 mL of a 5 mg mL−1 solution prepared by dissolving Sr(NO3)2 in 2 % HNO3 solution) were added to the (S13…S20) samples as a stable yield tracer,and 8 mL of concentrated reagents (HNO3: H2O2 = 3:1) were used for each of the eight aliquots as a digestion mixture.
After mineralization, the (S13…S20) aliquots were merged in pairs to achieve a presumed double radioactivity quantity. These four obtained samples were used
as duplicates for two of the four 90Sr separation methods: single separation followed by sequential precipitations and ion-exchange chromatography, followed by extraction chromatography and precipitation.
All the resin samples (S1…S20) were left in digestion vessels about 10  min for stopping effervescence due to decomposition of the organic matter.
The used digestion program for completeness of mineralization process consisted of three steps of heating (150
°C for 10 min, 200 °C for 30 min and 230 °C for 40 min) at a pressure of 40 bars.
2.2.2 Mineralized samples preparation for γ
measurements Each of the S1…S20  mineralized resin sample aliquots was filtered and evaporated to near dryness on a hotplate, and the residue was dissolved with 10 mL of 1.0 M HNO3 solution, and transferred to a 20  mL low diffusion polyethylene scintillation vial (LSC vial). Three milliliters of solution from S9…S12 vials were taken and mixed with 15  mL of Ultima Gold® AB scintillation cocktail for α-β
global counting with LSC technique. The other vials, eight (S1…S8) for first experiment and four (merged pairs of S13…S20) for the double activity experiment, were measured by γ spectrometry for the initial evaluation of the
interfering radionuclides activity in the spent resin.
In order to assess the strontium recovery due to acid digestion effervescence and filtration operations, four aliquots samples were prepared from non-radioactive resin
using the same procedures as for mineralization of spent ion-exchange resin, filtered, evaporated to near dryness,dissolved with 10  mL of 1.0  M HNO3  solution and measured by ICP-OE spectrometry.
Strontium was reproducibly recovered, with a very high recovery yield spanning from 99.11 % to 99.23 %, with an average value of (99.17 ± 0.76) %. Therefore, strontium is stable during the microwave acid digestion process and a direct addition of a Sr2+  stable yield tracer into the digestion vessels can be carried out with inevitable minimum
losses (less than 1 %) due to laboratory operations.
2.2.3 Separation of 90Sr from interfering radionuclides The Eichrom® Sr Resin is mainly used for Sr2+ separation on the base an extraction system that presents selectivity for strontium. The extractant is a crown-ether [4,4(5′)-dit-butylcyclohexano-18-crown-6], whose macro-cyclical structure delimits intramolecular cavities in which Sr2+ ions are retained, forming complexes with a high stability constant. The strontium affinity for the resin increases
with the nitric acid concentration, reaching a maximum value for a concentration of 8  M HNO3 . Therefore, high decontamination factors of interfering elements are achieved by loading the sample in 8 M HNO3  [12].
To assess the strontium amount that can be loaded on the Sr Resin column before the breakthrough and to find if the resin could be saturated by the presence of stable strontium, the following experiment was carried out: conditioning the column with 10  mL of 8  M HNO3
solution,loading with 10 mL of 8 M HNO3 containing 10 mg of Sr2+,rinsing with 10 mL of 8 M HNO3 and elution with 10 mLof 0.05 M HNO3 for measurement by ICP-OE spectrometry.The maximum resin capacity was found to be (7.83 ± 0.41)mg Sr2+/g of resin, showing a good agreement with the literature data [13–15]. Therefore the stable strontium amount of radioactive samples to pass on a 2 mL Sr Resin column must not exceed (4.97 ± 0.26) mg Sr2+ to achieve100 % strontium recovery. In the four 90Sr separationmethods, a 2.5  mg amount/aliquot of Sr2+ was used forextraction chromatographic technique.The Bio-Rad AG® 1 anion exchange resin is a stronglybasic anion exchanger with quaternary ammonium functional groups attached to the styrene divinylbenzene
copolymer lattice. Due to the high distribution coefficients of the anionic complexes formed by some metals
ions (Co2, Cu2+, Fe3+, Zn2+) with Cl− in high concentration of HCl solution, this resin represent an effective tool for separation of that metals ions [16–20].
To test that the Bio-Rad AG® 1 × 8 anion exchange resin is not saturated by the stable cobalt and strontiumquantities involved in the fourth separation method,the behavior of cobalt in the presence of strontium was studied using two samples of 9 M HCl solution containing 1 mg Co2+ and 2.5 mg of Sr2+ . Each of the two resin columns was prepared by soaking 1.44 g of resin in distilled water and packing into 2 mL polypropylene column (0.7 cm diameter and 5 cm filling height of resin). The columns were
conditioned with 10 mL of 9 M HCl solution, the samples were pass through the resin and washed with 10 mL of 9 MHCl solution. Co2+  was eluted with 10 mL of 5 M HCl solution. The effluent and washes (containing strontium), on
the one hand, and the eluate (containing cobalt), on the other hand, were collected, evaporated and dissolved with 10 mL of 2 % HNO3 solution for ICP-OE spectrometry. Sr2+was recovered with a yield of (99.44 ± 0.76) % and Co2+ was recovered with a yield of (99.60 ± 0.75) %. Therefore, it is considered that the amount of anion exchange resin used for the fourth separation experiment is not saturated by the presence of quantities of stable cobalt and strontium.
2.2.3.1 90Sr single separation
The S1 and S2 samples were evaporated to near dryness and dissolved in 10 mL of 8 M HNO3  solution.
Two Sr-selective resin columns were conditioned with 10 mL of 8 M HNO3  solution and the samples were loaded on the columns and let flow by gravity. Ten milliliters of 8 M HNO3  solution were used for washing resin columns to remove the matrix interferences. The radiochemical procedure is schematically shown in Figure 2. The time when
the last rinse with 8 M HNO3 solution completely drainedthrough the resin columns was recorded as the start timeof 90Y ingrowth.90Sr was eluted with 10 mL of 0.05 M HNO3 solution,evaporated to near dryness and transferred to LSC vialswith 13 mL of 1 M HNO3 solution for measurements by γ,LSC and ICP-OE spectrometry.
2.2.3.2 90Sr double separation
Four Sr-selective resin columns were used for the S3 and S4  samples, following the same procedure as for the single separation method. Two consecutive separations
were performed according to the radiochemical procedure schematically shown in Figure 2.
2.2.3.3 90Sr single separation followed by sequential precipitations
The S5 and S6 samples were prepared and loaded on the columns, according to the procedure described by single separation method.
90Sr was eluted with 10  mL of 0.05  M HNO3 solution into a centrifuge tube, and following carriers were addedto promote the sequential precipitations: 4  mg of Co2+(0.4  mL of a 10  mg mL−1 solution prepared by dissolving Co(NO3)2 · 6H2O in distilled water), and 7.5  mg of Sr2+ (0.75 mL of the 10 mg mL−1 solution also used as a carrier in mineralization process of spent resin samples).
On these samples a two-steps chemical treatment technique was performed: precipitation of transition elements (i. e. Co2+ ) as hydroxides M(OH)n [19], followed by alkaline-earth elements separation (i. e. Sr2+ ) as carbonates MCO3  [21]. The pH was increased to 9 using 1 M NaOH solution, the hydroxide precipitate was separated by centrifugation, and the supernatant was transferred to another centrifuge tube. The precipitate was washed with slightly alkaline distilled water in two successive 2.5 mL volumes and the washings were combined with the supernatant. 2.5 mg of Cs+
(0.25 mL of a 10 mg mL−1 solution prepared by dissolving CsNO3 in distilled water) were added,and 2 M Na2CO3  solution was pippeted to the supernatant to precipitate SrCO3 . The strontium carbonate separated from alkali metals ions (i. e. Cs+) by centrifugation was washed two times with 2.5 mL of slightly alkaline distilled water, and finally was dissolved with 13 mL of 1 M HNO3 solution and transferred to LSC vials for measurements by γ, LSC and ICP-OE spectrometry.
The same procedure was performed with the (S13,S14) and (S15, S16) merged pair samples, for the double activity experiment.
The radiochemical procedure is schematically shown in Figure 3.
Figure 2: Flow chart for 90Sr single separation and 90Sr double separation.
Figure 3: Flow chart for 90Sr single separation followed by two sequential precipitations.
2.2.3.4 90Sr separation by ion-exchange chromatography, followed by extraction chromatography and precipitation The S7 and S8 samples were evaporated to near dryness and 2 mL of 9 M HCl solution were added to dissolve the residue, and 0.1 mL Co2+  (of a 10 mg mL−1 solution prepared by dissolving CoCl2 · 6H2O in distilled water) were added to ensure a better separation on the anion exchange resin columns.
Two Bio-Rad AG® 1 × 8 anion exchange resin columns were equilibrated by passing 10  mL of 9  M HCl solution over the resin bed. The samples were then loaded on the columns, 10  mL of 9  M HCl solution were used to wash the resin columns, the effluent and washes were collected, evaporated to near dryness, dissolved with 10 mL
of 8 M HNO3
solution and kept for the next day in order to perform the same procedure as for single separation method. The 90Sr was eluted with 10 mL of 0.05 M HNO3 solution into a centrifuge tube, 2.5 mg of Cs+  (0.25 mL of a 10 mg mL−1 solution prepared by dissolving CsNO3 in distilled water) and 7.5 mg of Sr2+  (0.75 mL of the 10 mg mL−1 solution also used as a carrier in mineralization process of spent resin samples) were added, and 2 M Na2CO3 solution was pippeted to the eluate to precipitate SrCO3. The strontium carbonate separated from alkali metals ions (i. e. Cs+)
by centrifugation was washed two times with 2.5  mL of slightly alkaline distilled water, and finally was dissolved with 13 mL of 1 M HNO3 solution and transferred to LSC vials for measurements by γ, LSC and ICP-OE spectrometry.
The same procedure was performed with the (S17, S18) and (S19, S20) merged pair samples, for the double activity experiment.
The radiochemical procedure is schematically shown in Figure 4.
2.3 Eluted 90Sr fraction measurements
After the separation methods were performed, 3  mL of each 13 mL solution were taken and mixed with 15 mL of Ultima Gold® AB scintillation cocktail for 90Sr LSC measurements, the remained 10  mL were used for measurements by γ spectrometry, and finally 0.25 mL of solution
were sampled after γ measurements and dilutions were prepared to have a final strontium mass concentration spanning [0…4] mg L−1 for ICP-OES chemical recovery yield measurements.
The 90Sr (90Y) activity measurements were performed with LSC technique in the (0–2000) keV energy range, under normal count mode. The samples were counted as soon as possible after 90Sr separation and recounted several times during a period of maximum 27  days (enough time to consider that secular equilibrium between the two radionuclides was attained [4]), with an acquisition time of 60 min for each sample. The purpose of the repeated measurements was to verify whether the experimentally estimated activity of the samples complies with the expected theoretical model (increasing
yttrium activity with its half-life). A good match between the experimental and the theoretical data would be a confirmation of the correctness of the strontium separation processes.
Figure 4: Flow chart for 90Sr separation by using ion-exchange chromatography, followed by extraction chromatography and precipitation.
2.4 Data processing methods
All the reported uncertainties in this article, ±U, are expanded uncertainties, calculated using a coverage factor of 2, which gives a confidence level of approximately 95 %.
2.4.1 Adjustable modified efficiency tracing method
The efficiency tracing (ET) technique with 14C is used as an extrapolation method applied to 90Sr absolute activity measurements, because no quench correction curve is
required, only a single unquenched 14C standard, such as that used to normalize and calibrate the liquid scintillation analyzer [2, 4].
Moreover, to correct the disadvantages of this method, regarding its accuracy, low values limitations of quench parameter and background counts, a modified ET method (ET*) is performed according to the literature data, where background correction can be estimate, using adequate blank samples [22].
An adjustable modified efficiency tracing method (aET*) was used in this study. This technique offers a simplified methodology (only one measurement for the background, standard and each of the samples) and thus faster procedural operations steps, allowing background subtraction for the low level activity samples, and also permitting better fitting for the regression curve, all of these leading to more precise results, of the same level of accuracy obtained by DPM techniques. The operational principle of the aET* is depicted in Figure 5.
As in the ET* method, the 14C standard and 90Sr samples were counted only in one region, (0–2000) keV, equivalent to (1–4000) channels of the LSC instrument. The 90Sr net counts were calculated by background correction, for each channel, and then the sum of all these values was registered as the total of 90Sr net counts in region (0–2000)
keV. From this amount of counts, the entry value found in the first channel of 90Sr net counts was subtracted first, to obtain the total of counts in region (0.5–2000) keV. Then, from this last value, the number of counts registered in the second channel of 90Sr net counts was subtracted, to achieve the total of counts in region (1–2000) keV. Continuing this calculation routine from channel to channel,
the 90Sr net counts were performed for all the rest of the regions, (1.5–2000) keV, (2–2000) keV and so on. CPM values were then computed for each of these 90Sr regions.
An identical procedure was applied to calculate the 14C standard efficiencies, dividing the CPM values thus calculated for each channel to the DPM value written down on
the standard vial. The (14C efficiency; 90Sr net CPM) set ofdata represents the points of the graphical representation used to compute the 90Sr DPM value by linear regression.
In this way, the regression curve would be constructed not only of six points, or of six regions, as in ET and ET* methodologies, but of much more points, to maximize the
grade of regression curve fitting. Any number between 10 and 30 could be chosen, because a graphical representation with fewer points cannot describe so accurate the
sample data and a graphical representation with too many points does not offer flexibility for fitting the regression curve to experimental data. Then, the selected set of data is glided across the graphical representation, taking into account that the efficiency value of the 14C standard not to be less than 80 %.
According to Figure 5, a value of 21 channels (points) was used to represent the compact set of data, and the restrictive zone for 14C efficiency was found to be from channel 1 (96 %) to channel 32 (80 %). Therefore, the data set was glided across this zone (i. e. 1–21, 2–22, 3–23 and so on, up to 12–32 channels), and 12 curves were built. The best fit of them, based on the maximization of the coefficient of determination (R2), was found for the curve constructed between the 12 and 32 channels (i. e.R2 = 0.9999). This particular curve was then chosen to extrapolate the 90Sr net CPM value to 100 % counting efficiency, and thus the number of DPM in the 90Sr sample is
assessed.
The same procedural steps were accomplished for all the activity measurements of eluted 90Sr fractions.
2.4.2 Non-linear regression method
An iterative non-linear least square regression method was used to construct the theoretical model of the 90Sr activity evolution in purified samples. The comparison of the values produced by this model with the net count rates values (experimentally measured during the 27 days of sample counting) could provide a proof to support the accuracy of the 90Sr separation methods.
The initial theoretical net count rates were obtained on the base of the evolution equations [4] of the two radionuclides, 90Sr and 90Y, where it took into account the 90Y
growing according to the time between 90Sr separation and the midpoint of the measurement time of the sample
(Equation 1).
= 90Sr λ ∆ 90Y R R t [ ( 2 –exp ] – ) (1)
Where:
R = theoretical count rate of the sample [cpm];
R90Sr = count rate of 90Sr as half of the equilibrium
measured count rate [cpm];
λ90Y = decay constant for 90Y;
Δt = time interval between the marked time of 90Y ingrowth and the midpoint of the effective measurement duration [h].
An example of the operational principle of the nonlinear regression method is described in Table 1.
The scope of the iterative method was to minimize the value of the sum corresponding to the squares of the differences between experimental and calculated data. A non-linear regression process of calculation was started by using Solver® analysis tool (an add-in of Microsoft Excel® spreadsheet software). Varying the R90Sr value and using the same Equation 1, the iterative process was run until the least square condition was met and the final set of theoretical net count rates was achieved.
2.4.3 LSC efficiency
The value of LSC efficiency for each purified 90Sr fraction was calculated as a ratio between the CPM net count rate (obtained from the non-linear regression method) and the DPM value (achieved from the aET* method).
Table 1: Iterative non-linear least square regression method.
2.4.4 Total α-β activity discrimination
The total α-β activity measurement in radioactive waste represents a rapid and efficient method to estimate the radioactivity levels. These types of measurements seem to be a good choice, in terms of low-cost and efficiency (less working time, less human resources and reduced reagents consumption), to achieve quantitative evaluations [23, 24].
For α-β activity discrimination a full spectrum deconvolution method was used, based on the net differences between shapes of α and β scintillation spectra.
The region with α activity contribution in the total α-β LSC spectrum was identified and eliminated. The remaining spectrum data were fitted with an interpolation function such as to include the excluded α region, therefore β spectrum was generated. From the initial α-β full spectrum, the β spectrum was subtracted, to obtain α spectrum [25].
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Decontamination factors evaluation
The analyses by γ spectrometry were performed on the solutions recovered after both mineralization and at the end of the chemical treatment methods, for single and double activity experiments.
The samples resulted by mineralization process of the resin matrix contain 54Mn, 60Co, 134Cs and 137Cs β-γ emitters with activity levels showed in Table 2, in the following activity ratios: 54Mn:60Co:134Cs:137Cs = 1:58:20:1156 for the single activity experiment, and in the almost same proportion of 1:57:20:1100 for the double activity experiment.
Table 2: Initial γ activity level values [Bq mL−1] of the radioisotopes in samples.
Table 3: Decontamination factors, DF, and decontamination efficiencies, DE [%] for the single separation method.
The β-γ emitters activity measurement in the final solutions resulted by applying the single separation method showed a very high efficiency of this method with regard to 54Mn whose activity was below the minimum detectable activity (MDA) of 2.66 · 10−2 Bq mL−1, therefore its decontamination factor is higher than 6, which correspond to a decontamination efficiency presumed to be
almost 100 %. For the other three β-γ emitters (60Co, 134Cs and 137Cs) the decontamination factors and decontamination efficiencies values are presented in Table 3.
The total activity average of these last three β-γ emitters in 90Sr fraction resulted by performing a single separation was (1.09 ± 0.01) Bq mL−1. Radiocesium was retained
on a Sr-Resin column up to 0.5 % (0.34 % for the S1 sample and 0.43 % for the S2 replica), value confirmed by the data reported in the literature [12].
The other three methods of 90Sr separation (double separation by using two consecutive Sr-selective resin columns, single separation followed by sequential precipitations and ion-exchange chromatography, followed
by extraction chromatography and precipitation) revealed values of β-γ emitters activity below the MDA values (Table  4), for both activity experiments. Therefore, the decontamination efficiencies are presumed to be about 100 % for all measured β-γ emitters.
Based on the ratio between the β-γ emitters activity before and after 90Sr separation, on the one hand, and the MDA values for every radioisotope, on the other hand, in the less favorable case, the single separation method can be applied on the mineralized resin samples with activities of maximum 4.90 Bq mL−1 for 60Co, 2.61 Bq mL−1 for 134Cs and 7.06 Bq mL−1 for 137Cs, presuming that the 54Mn activity doesn’t exceed 0.25 Bq mL−1 like in the S2 sample.
Table 4: Decontamination factors for the interfering radioisotopes.
Table 3: Decontamination factors, DF, and decontamination efficiencies, DE [%] for the single separation method.
Figure 6: Measured count rates and calculated count rates for the four separation methods. (a) Single separation; (b) double separation; (c) single separation, two precipitations and (d) ion-exchange, extraction, precipitations.
3.2 Eluted 90Sr fraction activity and lsc
efficiencies evaluation The calculated net count rates compared with the ones obtained directly from the measurements are presented in Figure 6.
According to expectation, the Figure 6a shows a variation less than 8.6 % of the calculated count rates in comparison with measured count rates, due to the presence of
60Co, 134Cs and 137Cs interferences in 90Sr fraction resulted by using a single Sr-selective resin column.
According to the Figure 6b–d, with a variation less than 1 %, the experimentally measured net count rates respect very well the expected theoretical evolutions; therefore, the two sets of values, measured and calculated, are considered to be a very good match. This fact
provides a convincing argument to support the accuracy of these 90Sr separation methods.
The values of 90Sr activity in purified fractions achieved by application of the four separation methods are presented in Table 5.
For the single separation followed by precipitations and ion-exchange chromatography, followed by extraction chromatography and precipitation, the presence of
the 7.5  mg Sr2+ supplemental quantity have an insignificant influence on the counting efficiency comparative to double separation. For these two 90Sr separation methods,
the values of measurement efficiency, spanning from 98.29 % to 98.67 %, are comparable with the values of measurement efficiency of the double separation method (98.49 %–98.83 %).
For the double activity experiment the calculated et count rates compared with the ones obtained directly from the measurements are presented in Figure 7.
According to the Figure 7a and b, with a variation less than 0.5 %, the experimentally measured net count rates respect very well the expected theoretical evolutions. This fact provides a convincing argument to support the accuracy of these two selected 90Sr separation methods (single separation followed by precipitations and ion-exchange chromatography, followed by extraction chromatography and precipitation) even for higher activity values.
The values of 90Sr activity in purified fractions achieved by application of the two separation methods are, also, presented in Table 5; withal, the average values of measurement efficiencies are almost equal to 98.14 %.
3.2.1 Minimum detectable activity
MDA is a mathematical function of background counts,counting times of background and samples, counting efficiency and sample volume for analysis [26].
The blank samples, prepared from inactive samples using the same separation procedures, were measured by LSC technique. Taking into account the fact that the final matrix of the samples before measurement consists in 1 M HNO3  solution, the count rates in the blank samples have very tight values, spanning (51…53) counts per minute.
A volume of 3  mL per sample and a counting time of 60  min for both samples and background were used to achieve the MDA values. For all the 90Sr separation methods, the MDA values were lower than 0.025 Bq mL−1. These MDA values are 220 times lower than the 90Sr activity in eluted fractions (Figure 8). It reveals that the LSC technique can be used to assess the 90Sr activity in the ionexchange resin samples after the radiochemical purification of 90Sr.
3.3 Chemical yield evaluation of strontium
The chemical yield was monitored by ICP-OES measurement of stable Sr2+  carrier before and after chemical separation. The values of strontium recovery yield (summarized in Figure 9) are reproducible for each separation method in both single and double activity experiments, spanning from 89.94 % to 94.84 %, with an average value of (92.34 ± 0.60) %.
Table 5: 90Sr activity values [Bq mL−1] in purified fractions obtained by application of the four separation methods.
Figure 7: Measured count rates and calculated count rates for the two separation methods used in double activity experiment. (a) Single separation, two precipitations and (b) ion-exchange, extraction, precipitations.
Figure 8: Logarithmic scale representations of the 90Sr activity [Bq mL−1], MDA values [Bq mL−1] and their ratios.
Figure 9: Strontium recovery yields for (S1…S8) and (S13…S20) samples of spent ion-exchange resin.
Figure 10: α, β radionuclides spectra before and after 90Sr separations.
Table 6: Ratios between 90Sr, α and β activities values in the mineralized resin samples (values are rounded numbers).
3.4 Total α-β activity discrimination evaluation
The total α, β emitters composite spectrum in the samples resulted by mineralization process and prior to separations is depicted in Figure 10.
The spectra of α and β emitters are obtained by α-β deconvolution and are presented only in the overlapping interest zone. The β spectra of 90Sr after the four separation methods are also shown and it is observed that the shapes of these spectra aren’t affected by α radiation presence. Therefore, it is presumed that, after separations, all α interfering radionuclides are separated. The ratios between 90Sr, α and β activities values in the mineralized resin samples are presented in Table 6, and are calculated taking into account the chemical yield evaluation of strontium for every of the four separation methods.
4 Conclusions
For pre-treatment technique, microwave acid digestion proved to be an easy, rapid and reliable method for dissolution of the samples. The system limitation regarding the quantity of used organic matter can be surpassed by minimum two-pass digestions of samples and merging them after dissolution, without significant activity losses.
The results achieved by performing the four 90Sr separation methods, with the aim of 90Sr activity quantification
in spent ion-exchange resin samples, reveal that double separation, single separation followed by two precipitations and ion-exchange chromatography, followed by
extraction chromatography and precipitation represent interferences free 90Sr separation methods, obtaining very good decontamination efficiencies values (practically 100 %). For these methods, γ spectrometric measurements of purified fractions did not detect the presence of β-γ emitters and the experimentally measured 90Sr net countrates are in a very good match with the expected theoretical evolutions. Also, α interfering nuclides, in a minimum
2:1 ratio with 90Sr activity, can be removed. Therefore, these selective and quantitative separation methods can be performed prior to 90Sr activity assessment. Thus, after separation, 90Sr activities higher than 0.025 Bq mL−1 valuecan be estimated by applying LSC technique.Mathematical approaches (aET* and non-linear regression techniques) to quantify 90Sr activity values and LSC efficiencies were developed. No quench curve was needed for achievement this goal and less than 1 % of mismatching between the measured and expected values was
obtained.
The average chemical recovery yield, for each of theperformed separation procedures, exceeded 90 %; therefore these methods can be easily applied to samples with smaller quantities of 90Sr activity.
Disclosure statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding:
This work was supported by the Romanian Institute for Nuclear Research under Grant [number 3936].
