<title>Development of Fuel Pin with Uranium-Plutonium Nitride Fuel and Liquid-Metal Sublayer</title>
<author>E. O. Adamov; L. M. Zabud’ko; Yu. S. Mochalov; V. I. Rachkov; Yu. S. Khomyakov; F. N. Kryukov; M. V. Skupov</author>
<Affiliation>1 Innovation-Technology Center for Project Breakthrough (ITTsP Proryv), Moscow, Russia;State Science Center of the Russian Federation – Research Institute of Atomic Reactors (SSC RIAR), Dimitrovgrad, Russia；Bochvar High-Technology Research Institute of Inorganic Materials (VNIINM), Moscow, Russia.</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Atomic Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer Nature </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-020-00624-4</DOI>
<URL>http://sci-hub.ren/10.1007/s10512-020-00624-4</URL>
The status of development work on fuel pins with fast-reactor nitride fuel and a liquid-metal sublayer, which is being considered in Project Breakthrough (Project Proryv) together with fuel pins with a helium sub-layer, is
presented. Such fuel pins are shown to have the potential to improve the core characteristics of the advanced high-power reactors BR-1200 and BN-1200. The basic results for the development and fabrication of experimental nitride-fuel pins with different variants of the lead sublayer and the results of their tests in the BOR-60
reactor and post-reactor studies are presented. The problems of fabricating fuel pins with a lead sublayer are noted, possible solutions are discussed, and the required additional studies are indicated.
The priorities determining the place of fast reactors in the nuclear power system have now changed. The problems of safety (including environmental), competitiveness, accumulation of spent fuel and radioactive waste, non-proliferation, and optimal use of natural resources are now at the forefront. In Project Breakthrough, a choice was made in favor of dense uranium plutonium nitride fuel, which makes it possible to attain fundamentally new qualities of the core with BRA ~ 1, reduce the reactivity excess, and in the process keep other effects and coeffi cients of reactivity within admissible limits.
Nitride fuel was determined to be a promising fuel for a fast sodium-cooled reactor because of the high density and thermal conductivity, high melting temperature (>2700°C), compatibility with stainless steel, sodium, water at <60°C, and air at <25°C as well as with water methods of processing [1].
The global and Russian experience in developing dense fuels permits formulating the basic requirements of construction and operating conditions of optimized fuel pins with nitride fuel from the standpoint of safety and cost-effectiveness of a fast reactor: sublayer type – helium, effective density ≤80%, and maximum burnup >15–20% h.a. For high burnup of dense fuel and fuel pins with a gas sublayer, one of the problems is thermomechanical interaction of the fuel with the cladding, which could cause its loss of integrity. In the opinion of experts [2], as well as on the basis of positive results of irradiation in the BOR-60 reactor, this problem can be solved by reducing the effective density and creating open porosity in the fuel to allow gaseous fi ssion products to escape.
The development of mixed uranium plutonium nitride fuel is proceeding within the complex program of computational and experimental validation of dense fuel as part of Project Breakthrough [3]. In a lead-cooled reactor (BREST,BR-1200) the cladding material is EP-823-Sh low-swelling stainless steel, which is corrosion-resistant in lead so that swelling of the cladding is not a limiting factor for increasing fuel burnup. However, computational studies show that for maximum burnup above 9–10% h.a. inadequate fi re-resistance of the cladding in sections with higher cladding temperature or inadequate safety margin of long-time plasticity of the cladding in sections with lower fuel and cladding temperatures under conditions of contact loading on the fuel-side could become the limiting factor, even for fuel pins with porous (~15%) fuel pellets.
One of the possible solutions of this problem is to use fuel pins with a liquid-metal sublayer, the concept of which
stipulates absence of thermomechanical interaction of the fuel and cladding.
Potential improvement of the core using fuel pins with a liquid-metal sublayer. No in-depth studies and optimization of the core parameters of the advanced high-power reactors BR-1200 and BN-1200 aimed at full use of the advantages of fuel with a liquid-metal sublayer have been performed. Nonetheless, the conceptual studies show the following ways to
improve the core:
– increase fuel burnup, which not only reduces fuel consumption per megawatt of produced energy, it also permits optimizing the arrangement of the core, specifi cally, decrease the volume of in-reactor storage and increase the time between refuelings (to one or more years), thereby making it possible to increase the installed capacity utilization factor (ICUF) and improve cost-effectiveness;
– enhance safety by lowering the maximum fuel temperature and increasing the safety margin to melting or dissociation of the fuel;
– reduce the energy stored in the fuel, which promotes more favorable fl ow of accidents with loss of forced cooling of the core;
– reduce the temperature and power effects of reactivity;
– increase the Doppler coeffi cient of reactivity (inversely proportional to the square root of the fuel temperature).
At the same time, in reactivity accidents the sublayer can cause the maximum temperature of the fuel-pin cladding to increase, which requires additional analysis.
The liquid-metal sublayer can fully unveil the advantages of nitride fuel, whose high thermal conductivity is largely offset by using a gaseous sublayer. This makes it possible, on account of the minimization of the temperature-power effect of reactivity, to decrease the maximum reactivity excess of the reactor, which is accomplished in the cold state at zero power, for example, during refueling and scheduled maintenance. This improves safety in hypothetical or postulated reactivity accidents at power. By using a gas sublayer, reactivity excess can be reduced to the required level only for a reactor at nominal power.
Moreover, variation of the liquid-metal gap between the fuel-pin cladding and the fuel can be used to control the reactivity excess on burnup at different stages of nuclear fuel cycle closure up to the reactor reaching an equilibrium state.
Two variants of the design can be considered: for a lead-cooled reactor – fuel pin with a sodium or lead sublayer and for a reactor with sodium as coolant – fuel pin with a sodium sublayer. However, it is necessary to take account of the fact that the use of a sodium sublayer in BN-1200 can result in intensifi cation of the sodium void effect of reactivity, which, as shown in [4], must be limited. The possibility of sodium boiling inside a fuel pin in a lead-cooled reactor likewise requires special consideration.
On the whole, core development is held back by the lack of a fuel pin which reactor tests have substantiated and confi rmed.
Concept of a fuel pin with a liquid-metal sublayer. As is well-known, the fuel temperature in a fuel pin depends strongly on the conductivity of the gap between the fuel and cladding, which, in turn, is determined by the thermal conductivity of the medium in the gap (gas or liquid metal). The thermal conductivity of liquid metals (Pb, Na) is many times higher than that of helium (Table 1). Moreover, because the gaseous fi ssion products Xe and Kr, whose thermal conductivity is even lower, egress from the fuel by escaping beneath the cladding, the conductivity of the gas gap in a fuel pin degrades signifi cantly under exposure to radiation. Filling the gap with a liquid metal signifi cantly lowers the working temperature of the fuel (by hundreds of degrees), which lowers the rate of swelling of dense fuel compositions and makes it possible for a fuel pin to operate without thermomechanical interaction of the fuel with the cladding.
In designing fuel pins, it is important to secure the maximum possible fuel–cladding gap so that the cladding operates to the end of its service life. The structural parameters of fuel pins with a liquid-metal sublayer are presented in Table 2; some of the pins were irradiated in research reactors (Table 3).
As experience shows, the increase of the initial gap is bounded, fi rst of all, by an increase of the cracking of fuel pellets and movement of their fragments, which was confi rmed by studies of the nitride fuel pins with a sodium sublayer in the EBRII reactor (USA) [7]. The cladding remained whole only if the pellets were covered with special jackets preventing movement of the fuel fragments. However, depressurization before maximum burn up 9% h.a. was not observed in six of the fuel pins with maximum gap 0.76 mm. The obtained results have not been fully explained. It has been suggested that in a fuel pin with a large gap, even with signifi cant cracking of the fuel, the damage to the cladding can decrease as a resu lt of the
TABLE 1. Thermal Conductivity of Na, Pb–Bi, He, Kr, Xe, W/(m·K) [5]
TABLE 2. Design of Fast-Reactor Fuel Pins with Liquid-Metal Sublayer TABLE 3. Irradiation Conditions for Fuel Pins with Liquid-Metal Sublayer in Research Reactors Fig. 1. Experimental BOR-60 fuel pin with mixed uranium plutonium nitride fuel and lead sublayer: 1) bottom spacer made of EP-823 steel; 2) lead sub-layer; 3) EP-823 steel cladding; 4) fuel kernel; 5) top spacer made of EP-823 steel; 6) spring clip; 7) top end-piece (dimensions indicated in mm).
In summary, variants with diametric gap in the range of 0.5–0.6 mm can be considered in the BREST-OD-300 core design using fuel pins with a lead sublayer in 9.7 × 0.5 mm geometry.
When the fuel-cladding gap is increased, the density must be increased to ≥90% of the theoretical value and the effective fuel density in a fuel pin must be kept close to 80%. Preliminary computational estimates show that in a 9.7 × 0.5 mm BEST-OD-300 fuel pin there is no fuel–cladding contact right up to maximum fuel burnup ~15% h.a. Computational estimates show that even higher burnup can be achieved if there is no thermomechanical interaction between the fuel and cladding. In addition, when the gap is increased with the effective density kept unchanged, the pellet density must be increased to ≥95% of the theoretical value.
In 1999, a technical design of a fuel pin with a lead sublayer was developed at VNIINM for the BREST-OD-300 reactor without experimental confi rmation of operability under the conditions in a reactor. By this time, methods for creating a lead sublayer in a fuel pin were studied. It turned out that the technologically most adaptive method was to use a pressing rod together with vibration to sink a fuel column into molten lead. This method was perfected together with SSC RIAR in the process of fabricating the fuel pins of an autonomous channel with lead as the coolant (AKST-1).
The development and fabrication of four fuel pins with a lead sublayer for irradiation, as part of AKST-1, in the BOR-60 core is the fi rst stage of radiation validation of fuel pins for the BREST reactor. AKST-1 was irradiated from January 13 to May 12, 2002; the maximum burnup was equal to 0.44% h.a. and the maximum damaging dose 6.5 dpa. Post-reactorstudies of AKST and two fuel pins were performed. Visual inspection showed that the fuel pins retained their rectilinearity and hermiticity. Materials studies established that the structural state of the fuel kernel remained unchanged, the amount of fi ssion products produced in it was minimal, and there was no redistribution of the plutonium over the cross section of the fuel pellet.
The maximum thickness of the zone with corrosion damage to the anterior surface of cladding in two fuel pins was equal to 100 μm in the upper part of the core. The condition of the outer surface of the cladding made of EP-823-Sh steel, on which a protective oxide fi lm was deposited in the initial state by technology developed at SSC IPPE, is satisfactory. The oxide fi lm remained whole and adhesion with the cladding was good. The main reasons for the corrosion damage to the inner surface of the cladding are non-uniformity of the initial deformation, presence of technological defects, oxidation upon deposition of the outer oxide coating, deep deoxidation of the lead during preparation of pre-weighed samples for formation of the sublayer, and thermal oscillations during cooling-heating of AKST-1.
The experimental validation of the technical design of the BREST-OD-300 fuel pin required the development of fundamentally new equipment and monitoring devices as well as the creation of a technological zone for the fabrication of fuel pins in hermetic сhambers for different types of tests, including full-scale tests. The technological and control equipment,
methods of monitoring fuel and fuel pins, and technological zone developed at VNIINM in 2003 still make it possible to conduct studies in validation of the technology for fabricating BREST-OD-300 fuel pins and experimental fuel pins for radiation
tests and full-scale fuel pins up to 2400 mm long with low-background uranium-plutonium nitride fuel. The quality of the pouring of the contact material and revelation of local defects in the contact sublayer of a fuel pin were controlled by means of eddy currents, which procedure was implemented using eddy-current monitoring apparatus.
In 2003–2004, fi fteen fuel pins with EP-823-Sh steel cladding were fabricated for irradiation as part of two demountable experimental BOR-60 fuel assemblies. The design of a demountable FA makes it possible to extract individual fuel pins for post-reactor studies, install similar fuel pins as replacements, and continue irradiation. The design of a fuel pin is shown in Fig. 1.
The basic characteristics of fuel pins and the irradiation parameters in BOR-60 are as follows:
Fuel pin:
cladding diameter, mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9.4
cladding wall thickness, mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.5
Fuel pellet diameter, mm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.8–7.9
Maximum linear power density, kW/m . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Maximum cladding temperature, °C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 630
Maximum fuel temperature, °C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 810
Maximum burnup, % h.a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.5
Maximum damaging dose, dpa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Post-reactor studies were performed for three fuel pins in the BOR-60 assembly No. 128E2 after the fi rst, second, and third stages of irradiation with maximum burnup 2.8, 4, at 5.5% h.a., respectively [11, 12]. These studies showed progressing interaction of the cladding with the lead sublayer, which is characterized by its dissolution in some parts and formation of a layer of metallic deposits in other parts. After the third stage of irradiation, the maximum reduction of the cladding thickness in the upper section of the fuel column exceeded 40%. The reactor tests were stopped.
A new phenomenon was observed in the investigation of fuel pins with a lead sublayer: low-temperature recrystallization of the nitride fuel. After irradiation to burnup 5.5% h.a., aside from the technological porosity, accumulations of fi ne pores about 1 μm or smaller in size were found; this resulted in an increase of the total porosity of the fuel as compared to the periphery of a pellet. The porosity formed in the recrystallization process is one of the factors infl uencing the increase in the volume of the uranium plutonium nitride fuel: the swelling rate is 1.2–1.3%/% h.a. in sections with maximum burnup at temperature 750–830°C at the center of the fuel column [12].
Investigations of nitride fuel pins with lead sublayer in Project Breakthrough. To decrease the corrosion damage to fuel pin cladding, it was proposed at VNIINM that the lead be alloyed with components of EP-823 steel; magnesium and zirconium were proposed at IPPE. To check the hypothesis concerning the reasons for the intra-pin corrosion, fuel pins with different variants of liquid-metal sublayer were fabricated for the ETVS-4 experimental assembly of the BOR-60 reactor:
one fuel pin with lead saturated with oxygen, one fuel pin purifi ed from oxygen, and one purifi ed from oxygen and slightly alloyed with the components of EP-823 steel (three fuel pins), two fuel pins each with lead purifi ed from oxygen and alloyed with the components of EP-823 steel and two fuel pins each purifi ed of oxygen and alloyed with the components of EP-823 steel, magnesium and zirconium (four fuel pins).
The density of the nitride fuel in the fuel pins varied: three fuel pins each containing pellets with density 12.3 ± 0.2 and 13 ± 0.2 g/cm3  and one fuel pin with pellets of different density 12.3 ± 0.2 and 13 ± 0.2 g/cm3 . The pre-weighed lead samples for the ETVS-4 BOR-60 fuel pins were fabricated at IPPE; the fuel pins with EP-823-Sh steel cladding were fabricated at VNIINM.
The chosen and fabricated compositions of lead in fuel pins do not exhaust all possible combinations and solutions.
On the basis of studies of fuel pins with a lead sublayer, recommendations will be developed for continuing these studies if the irradiation of ETVS-4 fuel pins shows that it is expedient to continue the work in this direction.
In 2014, ETVS-4 was loaded into the core of the BOR-60 reactor. In May 2018, the No. 2 fuel pin, chosen for intermediate post-reactor studies, was extracted. The zone of the fuel column in this fuel pin was fi lled with S1 lead (GOST 3778–98) purifi ed from oxygen to mass fraction 10–5% and alloyed with the components of EP-823 steel (see Fig. 1). The maximum burnup was equal to 3.9% h.a. and the maximum damaging dose 59 dpa.
The post-reactor studies performed at RIAR showed that on the whole, metallographically, the state of a fuel pin is satisfactory. The structure of the fuel is characterized by the presence of several large fragments. The gap between the fuel kernel and the cladding in the cold state remained for all studied sections along the height of the fuel column. The corrosion state of the cladding is satisfactory; no indications of an interaction with the lead sub-layer were found in its bottom part. In the sample at the center of the active part of the fuel pin, the depth of the cladding microstructure that changed as a result of interaction with the lead did not exceed 5 μm. The greatest depth of changes in the state of the cladding was found in the top section of the active part. In this region of the fuel pin, dissolution as well as precipitation of the components of the cladding occurred on its inner surface, but the maximum depth of the cladding dissolution zone did not exceed 40 μm. The mechanical properties of the cladding of a fuel pin with a lead sublayer have the same predictable variation along the height of the fuel pin as a function of the temperature of irradiation and testing as the fuel pin with a helium sublayer, retaining at the same time in the zone of low-temperature radiation embrittlement the characteristics of plasticity observed at a higher level. So, at testing temperatures 350 and 380°C, the uniform elongation was equal to 0.3–0.4% and the overall relative elongation 1.9–2.2% with ultimate strength 1070–1200 MPa.
The obtained results confi rm the effi cacy of alloying the lead sublayer with the components of EP-823 steel, but additional studies of fuel pins with alternative methods of alloying are needed. The developers are of the opinion that alloying lead with magnesium and zirconium creates an additional barrier to the nitriding of steel – the zirconium nitride based coating spontaneously forming on its surface is characterized by the low penetrability of nitrogen; this makes it possible to attain an even lower level of corrosion damage to cladding. ETVS-4 must be irradiated to burnup 5–6% h.a., after which comparative post-reactor studies will be performed on two fuel pins with different types of sub-layer and two fuel pins with different pellet density.
Problems of the fabrication of fuel pins with a lead sublayer. A signifi cant drawback of alloyed lead is its high viscosity, which greatly complicates the fabrication of fuel pins. Using the laboratory technology developed at VNIINM, the fabrication time of a single fuel pin exceeded two days. One of the methods for solving the problem is to reduce the percentage content of magnesium to the lowest value giving the required level of anti-corrosion protection for cladding. Studies of less viscous alloys based on lead-bismuth, which are alloyed with magnesium, with additional additives of chemically active elements possessing near-zero volumetric effect upon solidifi cation are being conducted at MEPhI.
Discontinuities of the lead sublayer, which are not an indication for rejection, were noted during the fabrication of the fuel pins. These data are indicated in the data sheets of the fuel pins. The investigation of discontinuities of a lead sublayerwith burnup and the effect of discontinuities on the operability of the fuel pins are two problems that must be studied in future development work.
The regular production process differs from the laboratory piece-by-piece fuel-pin fabrication technology, but the algorithm for creating a sublayer is the same:
– preparation of pre-weighed lead samples for each unit size of the cladding;
– loading of the cladding with accessories (pre-weighed lead samples, bushings, fuel pellets, spring);
– placement of fi lled cladding into a furnace;
– creation of a sublayer in the furnace upon unloading with the use of a vibrator and delivery of argon (helium) under pressure into an article.
When the melting temperature of lead is reached, the accessories, including the fuel pellets, move downward under the action of the load and the lead rises upward, fi lling the gap between the fuel and the cladding.
The following technical solutions are used to obtain high-quality fi lling of the gap and decrease defects, for example, in the form of discontinuities:
– switching on a vibrator, operating with a defi nite frequency and amplitude, during the melting of the lead;
– delivering of inert gas (argon) under the pressure to the surface of the molten lead;
– directed crystallization of lead during cooling of an article on account of the structural features and operating regimes of the furnace.
The presence of the liquid metal sublayer fundamentally changes the design of a fuel pin, whose operability must be defi nitively validated in the technical design for normal operating conditions, deviations from normal conditions, and accidents. This requires the following:
– a rejection indicator for the liquid metal sublayer must be established and validated and reliable control methods developed;
– a fuel-pin fabrication technology must be perfected – investigation of directed melting and crystallization regimes for the sublayer and the infl uence on the stress-strain state of the cladding;  – methods must be developed for automating the fabrication of fuel pins using remote-control production, simplifi ed methods for fabricating fuel pins using lead alloys with high wettability and fl owability, methods for monitoring the continuity of the in-pin sub-layer, and technology for repairing fuel pins in the presence of deviations.
Required additional studies. To decrease the corrosion damage to cladding, specialists recommend excluding nickel in the in-pin elements (spring, spacers, and others) and developing ferritic chromium stainless steel alloyed with elements having greater oxygen affi nity than Fe and Cr, such as Al and Si (silchromal-type steel), including to achieve self-healing of the protective oxide fi lms.
For core optimization using fuel pins with a liquid-metal sublayer, it is necessary to validate the neutronic and thermohydraulic characteristics and safety and perform calculations of the balances and radiation characteristics of the fuel.
For economic evaluations, technical economic studies must be performed of the advantages of a liquid metal sublayer taking into account core optimization and fuel consumption reduction by increasing fuel burnup and the ICUF, on the one hand, and complicating the fuel-pin fabrication technology, on the other. Some experts stipulate a signifi cant reduction of the fabrications cost of fuel pins with a liquid metal sublayer in connection with less stringent requirements of nitride fuel quality (tolerance for geometry, oxygen content, stoichiometry). Other experts believe that with the use of remote-controlled assembly the cost of fabricating such fuel pins, conversely, will be higher. For large-scale production of fi llable fuel pins, it will be necessary to develop multiple-section furnaces of the revolving type, fuel pins will have to be hermetically sealed when they are fi lled with liquid metal, continuity of the sublayer will have to be controlled, and so on, which can result in higher operating costs.
Currently, there are no reliable data on the physicochemical composition of spent nitride fuel as a function of the type of sublayer, which complicates accurate assessment of the effect of the type of sublayer on the methods of reprocessing fuel pins and recycling wastes. In the opinion of experts, in using lead as a glass-forming additive the volume of the radioactive waste in reprocessing fuel pins with a lead sublayer may not change as compared with the gas gap variant. In the opposite case, the volume will increase by approximately 1.5-fold, but the cost of managing the waste is insignifi cant compared with the cost of fabricating fuel and reprocessing spent nitride fuel.
An R&D program for developing mixed uranium plutonium nitride fuel with average burnup reaching 12% h.a. has been developed as part of Project Breakthrough in order to attain the competitive advantages of power-generating units with nitride fuel. The direction 2 of the program on perfecting the design and technology for fabricating fuel pins for BREST and BN reactors with nitride fuel includes the problem of studying the design of a fuel pin with a liquid metal sublayer. For areactor with lead as the coolant, two design variants must be considered: a fuel pin with a lead-alloyed sublayer and a fuel pin with a sodium sublayer (a simpler fabrication technology); for a reactor with sodium as the coolant a fuel pin with a sodium sublayer must be considered. The studies include optimization and validation of the neutronic and thermohydraulic characteristics of the core, safety validation of the reactor, validation of the characteristics of the spent fuel, service life reliability of fuel, fuel-pin fabrication technologies, study of the infl uence of the type of sublayer on methods of reprocessing fuel pins, irradiation, and post-reactor studies of experimental fuel pins.
The work on fuel pins with a lead sublayer is to be completed before the end of 2019 based on the results of testing in BOR-60 – release of recommendations for adjusting the composition of the sublayer, optimization of the technological regimes, and fabrication of new fuel pins for tests in BOR-60.
