<title>A parametric study of operating carbon anodes in the oxide reduction process</title>
<author>A. Merwin; P. Motsegood; J. Willit; M.A. Williamson</author>
<Affiliation>Chemistry and Fuel Cycle Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL, 60439, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.jnucmat.2018.08.044</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002231151830624X</URL>
Abstract
A parametric study of the electrolytic reduction of uranium dioxide in molten lithium chloride – lithium oxide using carbon anodes was conducted to determine the operational parameter values necessary for high yields. Operational parameters evaluated in this study include anode and cathode current densities, anodic polarization, UO2 batch size, and method of electrochemical control. Seven oxide reduction experiments were conducted with between 25 g and 100 g UO2. The current density on the cathode was the critical parameter, which indicates the reduction process is kinetically controlled by cathodic reactions. High cell currents were achieved without the application of high anodic potentials by using a large anode surface area. This approach facilitates efficient reduction at high throughput without production of chlorine or other corrosive gasses.
Keywords:Electrolytic reduction;Pyroprocessing;Carbon anode
1. Introduction
Pyroprocessing of used oxide nuclear fuel is a multistep process involving a series of high temperature electrochemical processes for converting used oxide fuel into a recyclable product for next generation nuclear reactors. Electrolytic reduction of metal oxides to their metallic form, commonly referred to as the oxide reduction process, is the first step of pyroprocessing oxide fuels [1,2]. The electrolytic reduction of UO2 was first demonstrated at Argonne National Laboratory by Gourishankar, Redey, and Williamson [3], and subsequent development has been performed at Argonne National Laboratory, Idaho National Laboratory, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI), and other institutions [[4], [5], [6]]. Electrolytic reduction of used oxide fuel is an electrochemical process performed in a liquid lithium chloride (LiCl) bath containing approximately 1 wt % lithium oxide (Li2O) at 650 °C. Although process development has been successful using platinum as the anode material, deposited lithium metal attacks and degrades platinum electrodes [7]. Identifying alternative anode materials remains one of the principle challenges to the commercialization of the oxide reduction process [[8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]]. We are evaluating the use of carbon as an economic alternative anode material for the electrolytic reduction of used oxide nuclear fuel.
Several institutions have pursued the development of carbon anodes for use in the oxide reduction process [[14], [15], [16]]. In most cases, UO2 was selected as a surrogate for the used oxide fuel because it is the major constituent in the fuel and experimentation can be done in a glovebox instead of a hot-cell. The reduction of UO2 using a carbon anode was first demonstrated by Hur et al., though it was noted that the process did not go to completion when Li2O was present in the molten LiCl electrolyte [[14], [15], [16]]. The completion of the process is colloquially defined as reducing more than 95% of a batch of uranium oxide to a metallic form. Such a complete process is referred to as having a high reduction yield. Similar findings were reported by Joseph et al. [[14], [15], [16]]. Both studies indicated that when Li2O was included in the electrolyte, the uranium product consisted of an exterior shell of reduced uranium metal surrounding an inner core of unreduced UO2. The failure to complete the reduction process in a molten LiCl-Li2O electrolyte was attributed to the reaction of Li2O with carbon dioxide (CO2) at the anode interface to form salt-soluble lithium carbonate (Li2CO3). Work at KAERI has shown that Li2CO3 does not readily decompose to Li2O and CO2 under normal process conditions and that the presence of Li2CO3 decreases the efficiency of the reduction process [17].
Experiments at KAERI demonstrated that application of high anodic potentials can overcome the problems associated with carbon anodes in the electrolytic reduction of UO2 in a molten LiCl-Li2O electrolyte [17,18]. Similar unpublished results have been recorded at Argonne National Laboratory. In the work performed at KAERI, the anode was partially consumed during the experiment and the potential of the anode was driven to a minimum of +10 V vs. Li-Pb to achieve high cell currents. After conducting a series of oxide reductions under various operational conditions, the authors concluded that the conversion of UO2 to uranium metal was possible due to the formation of chlorine gas, which oxidized Li2CO3 and suppressed the formation of a metallic uranium shell in the product. While the application of such high anodic potentials was successful in reducing UO2, the production of oxidative gases corroded the stainless steel electrochemical cell used in the experiments. It was not known which operational parameters facilitated the success of these experiments, or if the production of corrosive gases is necessary to overcome the effects Li2CO3 and achieve efficient reduction.
We performed a parametric study of the electrolytic reduction of UO2 using graphite anodes to address these issues. Operational parameters including current density at the graphite anode and the stainless-steel cathode, UO2 batch size, extent of polarization, and mode of electrochemical control (current or voltage) were varied. The operational conditions were varied to determine which were necessary to achieve high yield reduction of UO2 using a graphite anode and to determine if the production of chlorine is necessary for effective reduction.
2. Materials and methods
The electrochemical cell used in this study was a lab-scale screening system designed for rapid turnaround experiments. Fig. 1 is a schematic of the electrochemical cell, which contains a LiCl-Li2O(1 wt %) molten salt electrolyte heated at 650 °C and a cathode basket holding up to 100 g UO2. Exhaust gas was swept from the cell by drawing glovebox common gas through the headspace. A Kepco BOP 20-20 M power supply capable of ±20 V and ±20 A was used for all experiments. The basket, anode support rods, crucible, and electrical connections were all made from 300-series stainless steel. The cathode and basket were not physically connected. A Ni|NiO reference electrode made by contacting a Ni wire with molten LiCl-Li2O saturated with NiO in a MgO tube with a porous bottom was used throughout this study. All potentials reported in this manuscript are given versus this Ni|NiO reference electrode. Data collection was performed using a Keysight Technologies 34970 A data logger, which was used to measure the cathode and anode potentials against the reference electrode simultaneously. Proper cell operation was confirmed by performing a reduction test using a platinum anode.
Fig. 1. Schematic of the lab-scale screening electrochemical cell used in the current study.
Graphite rods with a 6.4 mm OD were purchased from McMaster-Carr and were threaded to facilitate coupling to a threaded stainless steel rod for connecting to the electrical power circuit. The stainless steel rod was fixed to a vertical translation stage to facilitate adjusting the anode height. The height of the anode was used to control the surface area of the anode exposed to the molten salt electrolyte, and its resulting current density.
LiCl of 99.8% purity was procured from Noah Technologies. Li2O of 97% purity was procured from Sigma Aldrich. LiCl was dried at 550 °C for 14 h prior to the addition of Li2O. Salt masses varied between 0.7 and 1 kg, and had an initial concentration of 1 wt% Li2O in each experiment. All melts were held at 650 °C throughout the experiments. Purified UO2 from existing stocks was mechanically crushed and sieved to isolate the particle size fraction between 53 μm and 3.35 mm before loading into cathode baskets. Each experiment in this study utilized UO2 taken from a single batch of this sieved feedstock to minimize the variance in particle size throughout this study.
A Siemens's D-5000 X-ray diffractometer employing a Cu Kα source was used for X-ray diffraction analysis. A commercially available Drager tube placed in line with the off-gas system of the electrochemical cell was used for chlorine detection. Chemical analysis of the products used to estimate the extents of uranium conversion was performed by the Argonne Analytical Chemistry Laboratory. The uranium metal content was determined by a gravimetric analysis involving combustion of the product in air, assuming that only uranium metal and UO2 were present in the product and that all uranium was oxidized to U3O8 during the analysis. Samples of uranium product were rinsed with methanol prior to combustion to remove residual LiCl and lithium metal adhering to the samples.
The parameter values for the seven oxide reduction experiments performed in this study are summarized in Table 1. The run numbers correspond to the order in which the experiments were conducted, and the experiments are characterized by the operational parameters that were varied. The anode potential values provided in Table 1 and throughout this manuscript do not account for iR effects and are likely higher than the true potentials at the anode electrolyte interface. A qualitative analysis of the material yielded under each set of operational conditions is provided in Table 1, and photographs of the uranium products are provided in Fig. 2. This qualitative determination is based on visual analysis, mechanical behavior, and subsequent chemical analysis including XRD and combustion methods. It is noted that the average current per mass reported in Table 2 is based on the current that was recorded for the majority of the experiment, and is calculated using the starting mass of UO2 in each experiment.
Table 1. Summary of the test conditions for the oxide reduction experiments.
Fig. 2. Photographs of the uranium products yielded in each experiment.
Table 2. Extent of reduction analysis for three samples of the uranium product generated in Experiment#5.
3. Results
Experiments #1, #2, and #3 were operated in a constant voltage mode with the cell potential fixed between 7 and 8 V. These operational parameters were chosen due to the successful results obtained by Kim et al. at high anodic potentials 17. The evolution of an unquantified amount of chlorine was detected in the off-gas stream during Run # 3 using a Drager tube. The formation of chlorine verified that the applied anodic potentials were sufficiently high to oxidize the chloride ion and Li2CO3. When operating at a high anodic potential, it was observed that small differences in the immersion depth of the anode, which affected the immersed surface area, resulted in dramatically different cell currents. Furthermore, operating the cell at high applied anode potentials resulted in high anodic current densities and rapid consumption of the graphite electrode at the salt interface. This high rate of anode consumption resulted in frequent loss of continuity in the electrical power circuit and made the cell voltage and current difficult to control. The resulting intermittent cell behavior typical of these operating conditions is evident in the voltage and current responses shown in Fig. 3 for Experiment #3.
Fig. 3. (L) Electrode potentials and cell current for oxide reduction Experiment #3 conducted using a constant cell potential of 8 V resulting in an anode potential of approximately +6 V vs Ni|NiO and 5 A of cell current. (R) Photograph of product from Experiment #3 showing unreacted UO2 and layers of uranium metal.
The uranium product yielded in Experiments #1 and #2 were confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis to consist of metallic U. However, as shown in Fig. 3, the product yielded by Experiments #3 consisted of a metallic uranium shell surrounding an unreduced UO2 core. As previously discussed, this shell and core product structure is characteristic of the parasitic effects of Li2CO3 accumulation in the electrolyte resulting in incomplete reduction of the UO2 16−17. It is significant to note that the formation of chlorine was observed in Experiments #3, and, as a result, it can be concluded that the formation of chlorine does not necessarily indicate the parasitic effects of Li2CO3 formation were avoided. The only significant difference between the conditions used for successful reductions in Experiments #1 and #2 and the failed Experiment #3 was the higher mass of UO2 in the cathode of the failed experiment and the resulting lower current per unit mass (A/g).
Experiment #4 was conducted in a constant current mode due to the difficulties in controlling the electrochemical cell at a fixed potential. The cell current was increased to between 12 and 15 A to attain the current/mass ratio for operating conditions that were successful in Experiment #1 with 25 g UO2 to the 80 g UO2 used in Experiment #4. The voltage and current profiles recorded during Experiment #4 are shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. (L) Electrode potentials and cell current for oxide reduction Experiment #4 conducted using a constant cell current between 12 and 15 A resulting in an anode potential of approximately +6 V vs Ni|NiO. (R) Photograph of product from Experiment #4 showing uranium metal with a small quantity of UO2 dispersed throughout.
As demonstrated in Fig. 4, the electrochemical cell in Experiment #4 became increasingly difficult to control as the process progressed. The frequency of cell interruptions due to consumption of the anode increased throughout the duration of the test. The experiment was terminated after only 136% of the theoretical charge was passed through the cell due to a lack of control and an inability to maintain cell polarization.
As shown in Fig. 3, Fig. 4, the distribution of metallic uranium and unreduced UO2 in the products from Experiment #3 and #4 are clearly different. The shell and core structure produced in Experiment #3 was replaced in Experiment #4 by a uniform distribution of metallic uranium with localized regions of unreduced UO2. While localized regions of unreduced UO2 are visible in the Experiment #4 product, they are distributed throughout the product as opposed to forming a shell and core structure that plagued previous reduction experiments. The only operational conditions that were changed between Experiments #3 and #4 that could have resulted in the differences seen in the product structures were the method of electrochemical control and the higher cell current.
The progression to higher current operations was continued for Experiment # 5 due to the success of Experiment #4 in not producing the metallic uranium shell and UO2 core structure. The voltage and current profiles of Experiment #5 are shown in Fig. 5. The initial stages of Experiment #5 were conducted in a controlled voltage mode to avoid the challenges that resulted in the premature termination of Experiment #4. However, the extremely high current densities that resulted from operating the cell above 15 A caused a high rate of anode consumption and frequent circuit interruptions. After approximately 10 Amp hours (Ah) of electrolysis, the cell was switched to current controlled mode and the anode was lowered further into the electrolyte. It was observed that these two changes dramatically stabilized operations and facilitated passing 300% of the theoretical charge through the cell without excessive current interruptions.
Fig. 5. Electrode potentials and cell current for oxide reduction Experiment #5 conducted using a constant cell current of 20 A resulting in an anode potential of approximately +4.5 V vs Ni|NiO.
Following the switch to 20 A constant current and lowering the anode into the salt approximately 1 cm below its previous emersion depth, the remaining 90% of Experiment #5 was characterized by consistent cell operations with an anode potential of approximately +4.5 V vs Ni|NiO. The anode potential and corresponding anodic current density were significantly decreased by exposing more anode surface area to the electrolyte. The uranium product yielded under these operational conditions, shown in Fig. 2, is uniformly metallic uranium without distinct regions of residual UO2. As shown in Table 2, chemical analysis of three samples taken from separate regions in the Experiment #5 product consisted of greater than 91% metallic uranium. The XRD pattern of this product, shown in Fig. 6, includes peaks matching the JCPDS diffraction patterns of uranium metal and adhering LiCl salt. The UO2 content was too low to detect.
Fig. 6. XRD pattern of reduced product from Experiment #5.
High cell currents and high anode surface areas were used in Experiments #6 and #7. The voltage and current profiles from Experiments #6 and #7 are shown in Fig. 7. A nearly identical cell behavior was recorded in both experiments. These experiments were conducted with an immersed carbon anode surface area of approximately 5 cm2 using a constant cell current of 20 A. The larger anode surface areas that were exposed to the electrolyte resulted in lower anodic current densities on the order of 4 A/cm2. This relatively low anodic current density corresponded to an applied anode potential of approximately +3.5 V vs Ni|NiO, which is significantly lower than those applied in Experiments #1–3. No evidence of chlorine evolution was observed in Experiments #6 and #7, and it is proposed that these anodic potentials were not high enough for chloride ion oxidation. The operational behavior in Experiments #6 and #7 represent a significant improvement over Experiments #1–3, as the absence of evolving unwanted oxidative gasses relaxes constraints on the materials of construction used in the electrochemical cell. Furthermore, the cell was operated in a highly controlled manner in these tests and did not suffer from frequent cell interruptions caused by rapid consumption of the carbon anode.
Fig. 7. Electrode potentials and cell current for oxide reduction Experiment (L) #6 and (R) #7 conducted using a constant cell current of 20 A resulting in anode potential of approximately +3.5 V vs Ni|NiO in both experiments.
A comparison of Experiments #1, #2, and #3 shows that application of a high anodic potential is not sufficient to overcome the effects of Li2CO3 accumulation in the electrolyte. Additionally, a comparison between Experiment #3 and #4 proves that the cell current affects the local efficiency of UO2 reduction in the cathode. Finally, the results of Experiments #5, #6, and #7 prove that efficient reduction of UO2 to metal can be achieved using a carbon anode in molten LiCl-Li2O without applying excessively high anodic potentials. Therefore, this set of comparative experiments has demonstrated that the cell current is the principle operational parameter of importance rather than the applied anode potential.
Tabulated values of the cell current per unit UO2 mass in each experiment are provided in Table 1. This metric is higher than 0.1 A/g in all experiments that generated fully reduced uranium products, and more than a factor of two lower in the experiment that produced the shell and core product structure that plagued previous experiments using carbon anodes. Because a constant size fraction of crushed UO2 starting material was used in all experiments, the current-per-unit mass UO2 metric has a direct correlation to current-per-unit surface area of UO2. It is likely that the current density controls the success of reduction operations, since the current per unit surface area governs electrochemical reaction kinetics and the overpotential of electrochemical processes. Additional tests using different mesh size fractions are required to verify this proposal.
The results of this study are in agreement with the systematic study of carbon anodes at high anodic potentials reported by Kim et al.17, but lead to a different conclusion. Experiments at KAERI by Kim et al.17 showed that carbon anodes effectively reduced UO2 in tests at cell voltages greater than or equal to 10 V. The single experiment they conducted at a cell voltage of 4.2 V yielded a product with the characteristic structure of a metallic uranium shell surrounding an unreduced UO2 core. This result lead to the conclusion that formation of chlorine was necessary to completely reduce UO2. However, due to the use of a fixed anode surface area in all tests, the low anodic polarization in the unsuccessful experiment resulted in a cell current that was an order of magnitude lower than the cell currents applied in all successful tests conducted at high anodic potentials. As a result, the cell currents per unit mass of UO2 were all greater than 0.19 A/g in the successful tests, but only 0.029 A/g in the failed test. Therefore, considering the results of our study, as well as those in previous reports, it is proposed that the ability of carbon anodes to successfully reduce UO2 is not governed by the applied anode potential, but by the current density at the cathode.
4. Conclusions
A series of electrolytic reduction experiments employing carbon anodes was performed under a range of operational conditions to determine the necessary and sufficient conditions for reducing UO2 in molten LiCl-Li2O. It was shown that application of anodic potentials higher than the oxidation potential of the chloride ion is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for avoiding the problems associated with Li2CO3 accumulation in the electrolyte. Instead, the application of high current densities at the cathode appears to be necessary for high reduction yields. This conclusion is consistent with and explains results from previous studies. A comparison of the operational parameters varied in this study indicates that the electrochemical processes using carbon anodes that result in nearly completely reduced uranium products are kinetically limited by cathodic reactions. Future research will employ high currents and high anode surface areas in larger scale electrolytic reduction systems to optimize process operations using the lessons learned in this study.
Data availability
The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study.
Acknowledgments
The submitted manuscript has been created by U Chicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of Argonne National Laboratory (“Argonne”). Argonne, a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory, is operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The authors thank Dr. D. Graczyk for uranium and salt composition analyses. The U.S. Government retains for itself, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government. Argonne National Laboratory's work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy, under contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
