<title>Simultaneous separation of Am and Cm from Nd and Sm by multi-step extraction using the TODGA-DTPA-BA-HNO3 system</title>
<author>Yuji Sasaki; Keisuke Morita; Masahiko Matsumiya; Masahiko Nakase</author>
<Affiliation>Japan Atomic Energy Agency , Tokai, Ibaraki 319-1195 , Japan ; Yokohama National University , 79-1 Tokiwadai , Yokohama 240-8501 , Japan ; Tokyo Institute and Technology , 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku , Tokyo 152-8550 , Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiochimica Acta</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Walter de Gruyter GmbH</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1515/ract-2019-3215</DOI>
<URL>http://sci-hub.ren/10.1515/ract-2019-3215</URL>
Abstract:
The simultaneous separation of Am and Cm from lanthanides is important for atomic energy fields. However, the process is difficult owing to the chemical behavior of trivalent metal ions with similar ionic radii. All lanthanides, Am, and Cm can be extracted by diglycolamide (DGA). In addition, relatively high separation factors between An and Ln were obtained by the extraction system of TODGA, DTPA (diethylenetriamine-N,N,N′,N″,N″- pentaacetic acid) and HNO3. In this work, DTPA-BA (diethylenetriamine-N,N′,N″-triacetic-N,N″-bisamide), which is an improved version of DTPA, was employed for the separation of Ln and An. After performing a basic study on DTPA-BA, a relatively high separation factor (approximately 8) for actinides/lanthanides was obtained. Then, the multi-step extraction was performed. Thus, the recoveries of 94.7 % for Nd and 4.7 % for Am and Cm in organic phase, and 5.3 % Nd and 95.3 % for Am and Cm in aqueous phase were obtained.
Keywords: An；Ln；TODG；DTPA-BA；multi-step；extraction
1 Introduction
Minor actinides (MAs), Am and Cm, exist in spent nuclear fuel (SNF) and high level radioactive liquid waste (HLW), and their concentrations calculated by the ORIGEN II code are 569 g and 43.4 g in 1 t of SNF for LWR-45G (PWR/ UO2 , 45 GWd/tHM) and 0.32 g/L and 0.07 g/L in HLW (LWR 28 GWd/t), respectively [1]. These actinides (An) possess high α activity and calorific values. Thus, Am and Cm need be recovered from HLW. Some of the methods use Am and Cm for MA fuel and then transmuted, or Cm is kept at the interim storage until its radioactivity diminishes. Both methods are available after the simultaneous separation from matrix lanthanides (Ln). The separation of Ln and An is commonly performed using soft donor extractants [2–6] and promising masking agents [7–10]. The application of masking agents is used in the TALSPEAK (Trivalent Actinide-Lanthanide Separations by Phosphorus-reagent Extraction from Aqueous Complexes) method. However, this approach requires additional research. Ln and trivalent An can be easily extracted by DGA (diglycolamide) compounds. TODGA (N,N,N′,N′- tetraoctyl-diglycolamide) can extract both metals.
Therefore, a masking agent is needed to obtain a high separation factor (SF) between An and Ln. In this work, a novel masking agent, DTPA-BA (diethylenetriamineN,N′,N″-triacetic-N,N″-bisamide, Figure 1), is employed. It is well-known that commercially available DTPA (diethylenetriamine- N,N,N′,N″,N″-pentaacetic acid) is used as a masking agent in the TALSPEAK method [11–12]. The disadvantage of using DTPA is its low solubility in water and acids. Therefore, Na-salt is required to increase D values and adjust pH. Our experiments use salt-free conditions.
The modification of DTPA from its anhydride compoundsis widely studied [13–19] and tested for complexation with Ln. Our DTPA-BA dissolves well in acids; thus, 1  M DTPA-BA in 1 M HNO3 can be readily prepared [20–21]. This salt-free approach decreases the secondary waste. Previous studies, which achieved An/Ln separation using the TODGA-DTPA system, the separation factor of approximately 10 [SF, defined as D(Ln)/D(An)] has been reported [11]. This result indicates the difficulties of solo-extractions. Therefore, multi-step extractions are essential to recover these metals. In our study, the multi-step extraction was employed as a batch-method, and the usability of the complexing agent was investigated. The batchwise multi-step extraction is classically termed as Craig extraction method [22–23], the method was available to biochemistry at that time. This method was replaced to chromatography, however, it includes still some of advantages, (1) small volume of sample solution is accessible, (2) not necessary to use mixer-settler and (3) available to combine the different step numbers between organic and aqueous phases. After the confirmation ofthe optimal separation condition using the D values to fix the number of steps of aqueos phases with and without metal and organic phases, the separation of An from Ln was carried out.
Figure 1: Structures of TODGA and DTPA-BA.
2 Experimental
2.1 Reagents
TODGA and DTPA-BA were obtained from Wako Pure Chemical Industries. TODGA and DTPA-BA with 98 % and 96 % purity, respectively, were used for solvent extraction without further purification. Standard Ln solutions with 1000-ppm concentrations (Wako Pure Chemical Industries) were used for solvent extraction. Other reagents(e. g. n-dodecane, nitric acid, Nd2O3, and Dy2O3) were ofanalytical grade.
2.2 Batch extraction method
TODGA and DTPA-BA were dissolved in n-dodecaneand 0.3–1  M HNO3, respectively. Nd2O3 and Dy2O3 weredissolved in HNO3 at ambient temperature to produce desired concentrations. Here the maximum metal concentration in aqueous phase was 30 mM Nd or Sm when 0.3  M TODGA in n-dodecane was used. Each standard solution containing metals was evaporated, and the residues were dissolved in HNO3  of a suitable concentration. The organic and aqueous phases were mixed and mechanically shaken at 1500  strokes/min for 30  min at 25 ± 0.1 °C. After centrifugation, the metal concentrations in the aliquots taken from the aqueous phases were measured by ICP-OES (SPS3100, Seiko Instruments Inc.) or ICP-MS (SPQ 9000, Seiko-EG&G). The metal concentrations in the organic phases were obtained by subtractingthe aqueous concentration from the initial concentration. Alternatively, an aliquot of the organic phase was decomposed in HNO3 –HClO4, and the residue was dissolved in0.5 M HNO3 prior to elemental analysis. The D value was defined as the ratio of [M] in the organic phase to [M] in the aqueous phase.
2.3 Simulation of metal concentration in each extraction step The schematic diagrams of multi-step extractions are shown in Figure 2. A similar extraction of U by TBP was carried out by Thai researchers [24]. An Excel-based calculation was performed. Using the D values for each metal, the metal concentrations transferred to organic and aqueous phases at each extraction step were obtained using D/(1 +D) and 1/(1 +D), respectively. This calculation is repeated for all extraction steps. The least squares method is used to fit calculated values to the experimental data.
2.4 Multi-step extractions
Multi-step extractions were performed. Aqueous phases with or without metals and organic phases were prepared. After determining the number of extraction steps, the first aqueous (1′) and organic phases (1), shown in Figure 2, were mixed and shaken (1st step). After the 1st step extraction, the organic phase (1) was removed and introduced into the aqueous phase (2′) and shaken. The aqueous phase (1′) after the 1st step extraction was introduced into the organic phase (2) and shaken (2nd step for the aqueous phase). The next (3rd) extraction step included 1-3′, 2-2′, and 3-1′ pairs for the number of organic and aqueous phases. The next (4th) extraction step included 1-4′, 2-3′, 3-2′, and 4-1′ pairs, and the steps were repeated until the optimal numbers of extractions was reached. This method is not a conventional countercurrent extraction. However, it can approximately reveal the behavior of metal at each multi-step extraction. This method allows to use various aqueous and organic phases, and the process can  e performed without specialized equipment such as a mixer-settler. Similar studies have been performed in [24–26]. The described process is a batchwise or flow system, which does not use a mixer-settler.
3 Results and Discussion
3.1 pH values after dissolving DTPA-BA in acids DTPA-BA exhibits high solubility in acids; approximately 1 M DTPA-BA in water can be prepared. However, DTPA-BA is an amic acid. Thus, after dissolution in the aqueous phase, DTPA-BA acts a pH buffer. Prior to the solvent extraction experiments, the pH value of acidic solution, which dissolved DTPA-BA, was measured. Table 1 shows the concentration of HNO3 as a dissolving solution (0.5, 0.6, and 1 M), DTPA-BA as a solute, and pH before and after the preparation of solution. Table 1 indicates that the pH values of these solutions increased with increase in the DTPA-BA concentration. This observation suggests that DTPA-BA acts as a pH buffer even at low pH. A previous study [11] suggests that DTPA acts as a masking agent for Ln and An at pH 1–2. Thus, DTPA-BA can form complexes in the solutions shown in Table 1 without a pH buffer or metal salts.
3.2 Ln patterns in the extraction system of
TODGA-DTPA-BA In a previous study, the TODGA-DTPA extraction system showed a decrease in D(Ln) and D(An) with an increase in DTPA concentrations and pH values [11]. It was clarified that the Ln pattern [defined as the relation of D(Ln) and atomic number of Ln] exhibits a previously unknown V shape, which shows lower D values for Nd and Sm in the Ln series. The stability constants for Am and Cm with DTPA were higher than those for Ln [27–28]. Thus, D(An) decreased more than D(Ln) by the addition of DTPA and increase in pH. In this study, two different conditions were used to vary the Ln pattern. First, fixed TODGA (0.3 M) and DTPA-BA (0.4 M) concentrations but with different pH values were used to observe the Ln pattern (Figure 3). Second, fixed TODGA concentration (0.3 M) and pH values (1.01 or 1.28) in 1  M (H, Na)NO3  with different DTPA-BA concentration were used (Figure 4). As shown in Figure 3, D(Ln) decreased with pH values and exhibited a V shape.Specifically, lower D(Nd, Sm, Eu) values in the Ln seris were observed at pH of 1.088–1.731. These patterns are similar to those obtained by the TODGA-DTPA extraction system. T us, DTPA-BA indicates an analogous effect for the Ln-complexation with DTPA. Figure 4a shows that the results at pH 1.01 and 0.5 M DTPA-BA indicate different a Ln pattern from those in this figure. At pH 1.01, the high concentration of DTPA-BA was required to change the Ln pattern. However, Figure 4b shows the results at pH 1.28 and  .2–0.5 M DTPA-BA, which exhibit a similar V shape of the Ln pattern. At higher pH, due to the dissociation ofDTPA-BA, m re Ln can be complexed with DTPA-BA in the aqueous phase. This study suggests that the Ln pattern is considerably influenced by DTPA-BA concentrations and pH values.
Table 1: pH values for the solutions of DTPA-BA in HNO3
Figure 2: Schematic diagram of the multi-step extraction, organic phase: 12 steps (1–12), aqueous phase with metal: 5 steps (1′–5′), and without metal: 7 steps (6′–12′).
Figure 3: Ln patterns for 0.3 M TODGA/n-dodecane and 0.4 M DTPABA/1 M HNO3  at pH of 0.87–1.73.
Figure 4: Ln patterns for 0.3 M TODGA/n-dodecane and 0.2–0.5 M DTPA-BA/1 M HNO3 .(a) pH 1.01, (b) pH 1.28.
Figure 5: Dependence of pH on D(Ln) for 0.3 M TODGA/n-dodecane and 0.4 M DTPA-BA/1 M HNO3. (a) La-Gd, (b) Tb-Lu.
3.3 Extraction behavior of Ln and An in the TODGA-DTPA-BA system The extraction reactions between Ln (An), TODGA, and DTPA-BA were studied by slope analysis. Figure 5 showsthe relation between D(Ln) and pH at 0.3 M TODGA–0.4 M DTPA-BA in 1 M (H, Na)NO3 . All Ln indicate less dependency on pH at low pH (pH < 1) because of the lower dissociation of proton from DTPA-BA. Thus, the slope values were calculated using the pH values from 1.2 to 1.8. The calculation results are shown in Table 2. The slopes with negative values mean the decrease in D with increase in pH, which suggests the complexation of Ln with DTPA-BA and back-extraction from the TODGA solvent.
The slope values are within −2.49 to −3.76. The number of protons associated with the extraction reaction may be 2–4, which agrees with the number of protons dissociated from the DTPA-BA molecule (maximum of 4). Here, acidic conditions provide the main chemical species to protonated H+ -DTPA-BA. The y-intercept (Int, y) values (logarithmic D values at pH: 0) increase gradually with the atomic number of Ln. These values are related to the extractability of Ln with TODGA. It is well-known that TODGA can extract heavy Ln better than light Ln [29–31].
The relationship between D(Ln) and DTPA-BA concentrations at 0.3 M TODGA–1 M (H,Na)NO3  and pH of 1.4–1.42 are shown in Figure 6. Four types of relations can be seen in Figure 6, from La to Pr [Figure 6a], Nd to Gd [6b], Tb to Ho [6c], and Er to Lu [6d]. The Ds of light and heavy Ln decrease gradually with increase in the DTPA-BA concentration (10−3–10−1 M) with a slope lower than −1. Then, D decreases sharply from 0.1 M of DTPA-BA to the higher concentration range. Figure 6a, c, d indicate the β2 and β1 components. Then, the non-linear least square method was performed to fit these plots. The results are shown in
Table 3. Here, β1 and β2 were obtained from the slopes in
Figure 6. From these results, it is clear that some of the lanthanide ions form a 1:2 complex at the high concentration of DTPA-BA. However, medium Ln has an approximately linear relation under these conditions [Figure 6b]. The different chemical behavior between Ln may result in the V shape of the Ln pattern (Figures 3 and 4). The extractionbehavior is not well-understood. The medium Ln, Nd, Sm，Eu, and Gd show a straight relationship with a slope of −1.
These metals indicate the following extraction reaction:
@(1)
The results for Am and Cm under similar conditions are shown in Figure 7a and b. These figures show the dependence of D on pH and DTPA-BA concentration. These plots show approximately straight lines. The slopes for these data are, respectively, −3.49 and −3.46 for Am and Cm with 0.1  M TODGA–0.01  M DTPA-BA in 1  M (H,Na)NO3 , and −3.41 and −3.68 for Am and Cm with 0.3 M TODGA–0.4 M DTPA-BA in 1 M (H,Na)NO3 [Figure 7a]. The slopes are −0.999 and −1.14 for Am and Cm with 0.1  M TODGA (pH 1.45) in 1M (H,Na)NO3 , and −0.803 and −0.797 for Am and Cm with 0.3 M TODGA (pH 1.42) in 1 M (H,Na) NO3[Figure 7b]. These results are in agreement with the extraction reaction (1). Although the reaction (1) is limited to Nd, Sm, and Eu, the chemical behavior of Am and Cm is similar to that of the medium Ln. 3.4 SFs between Ln and An
As described above, the difference in stability constants between Ln and An with DTPA results in high separation factor [SF =  D(Ln)/D(An)]. The stability constants of Am and Cm with DTPA are higher than those of Ln. Then, D(An) is lower than D(Ln) through complexation with DTPA, which indicates the effective removal of An from the organic phase. In this work, the SF values for Nd/Am and Sm/Cm are summarized and plotted against the DTPA-BA concentration (Figure 8) at 0.3–0.5 M TODGA with 0.001–0.4  M DTPA-BA in 0.5–1  M HNO3 . Here, we focus on Nd and Sm as representatives of Ln, because (1) these Ln possess ionic radii that are similar to Am and Cm, (2) Nd concentration is one of the highest values in HLW, and (3) these Ln exhibit D values that are similar to Am and Cm compared with the other Ln [11, 32–34]. These results indicate that high SF(Ln/An) can be achieved at the high concentration of extractant and masking agent. The highest SF for Nd/Am (14.9) and Sm/Cm (10.1) is observed for 0.3 M TODGA–0.6 M DTPA-BA in 1 M HNO3 and 0.3 M TODGA–0.55  M DTPA-BA in 1  M HNO3 , respectively. On the basis of these results, SF(Ln/An) are plotted against pH under the same concentrations of the extractant and masking agent [0.3 M TODGA–0.4 M DTPA-BA in 1 M HNO3 (Figure 9)]. This figure shows the gradual increase in SF with increase in pH. High pH promotes the dissociation of DTPA-BA, which r sults in high separation performance by DTPA-BA. T erefore, high concentrations of TODGA and DTPA-BA at hi h pH may result in high SF(Ln/An).
However, the excessively high concentration of DTPA-BA at high pH results in considerably small D values (much lower than 1). Therefore, this condition is not suitable for the mutual separation experiments.
Table 2: Slope and intercept values (Int, y)a from Figure 5.
Figure 6: Dependence of DTPA-BA concentration on D(Ln) for 0.3 M TODGA/n-dodecane and 0.001–0.4 M DTPA-BA/1 M HNO3at pH of 1.4–1.42. (a) La-Pr, (b) Nd-Gd, (c) Tb-Ho, (d) Er-Lu.
Table 3: β1 and β2 values form Figure 6.
Figure 7: Behavior of Am and Cm for the TODGA-DTPA-BA extraction system.(a) Dependence of pH on D(An), (b) Dependence of DTPA-BA concentration on D(An).
Figure 8: Dependence of SF of Nd/Am and Sm/Cm on DTPA-BA concentration.(a) SF for Nd/Am, (b) SF for Sm/Cm.
Figure 9: Dependence of SF of Nd/Am and Sm/Cm on pH or 0.3 M TODGA/n-dodecane and 0.4 M DTPA-BA/1 M HNO3.
3.5 Multi-step extraction using the TODGADTPA-BA extraction system
Prior to this study, we carefully determined the conditions and obtained results because significant error can be generated through multi-step extractions. It is known that D for extractive and decontaminating metals should be higher and lower than 1, respectively. Table 4 summarizesextraction conditions, D(Ln, An), and their SF. On the basis of these results, the conditions of 0.3  M TODGA/n-dodecane and 0.5 M DTPA-BA/1 M HNO3 are preferable to the condition of multi-step extraction. Table 4 shows that D(Nd, Sm, Am, Cm) and SF(Nd/Am, Sm/Cm) are 2.11, 2.41, 0.255, 0.291, and 8.27 and 8.29, respectively.
Before the experiments, the calculation of optimal conditions of multi-step extraction was performed, and the optimal number of aqueous and organic phases was considered. On the basis of the calculation, the suitable number of aqueous phases with metals, aqueous phases without metals, and organic phases was determined to be 5, 7, and 12 steps, respectively. These conditions result in the recovery of Nd with the co-extraction of Am in the organic phase of 98.16 and 0.9 %, respectively. A probable profile of metal concentrations (%) in the organicand aqueous phases versus the number of extraction step is shown in Figure 10. The schematic diagram of this multi-step extraction has already been shown in Figure 2.
Here, the metal concentration ( %) is defined as the ratioof metal concentration obtained in each extraction step versus the total concentration. The metal concentration at each extraction step can be determined based on their D value, according to the plate theory in chromatography.
The experimental results at the abovementioned conditions are shown in Figure 11. Here, the An experiments using both Am and Cm were performed simultaneously, and the metals were measured by a liquid scintillation ounter at the same time. The results in Figure 11 are similar to those in Figure 10. Specifically, the peaks of metal-concentration ratios can be seen in steps 4–5 (calculation) and 3–4 (experiment) for Nd and Sm, and in 5–6 (calculation and experiment) for An. These results suggest the validity of the experiments and calculations. The overall calculation and experimental results are shown in Table 5. From Table 5, the D values are almost same.
However, the recoveries into organic and aqueous phases are smaller than expected. To achieve better separation, more extraction steps and higher SF of Ln/An are needed.
4 Summary
Using Craig extraction method, we can successfully separate An and Ln. The novel masking agent, DTPA-BA, whosechemical structure is similar to that of DTPA, was tested for the separation of Ln/An. Using the TODGA extractant, it was determined that DTPA-BA works as the masking agent of Ln and exhibits activity that is similar to that of DTPA.DTPA-BA works at pH of 1 < pH < 2. The extraction reaction of DTPA-BA and Ln was studied, and the results indicate a different reaction between light, medium, and heavy Ln.
The medium Ln, namely Nd, Sm, and Eu, as well as Amand Cm indicate that the reaction M(DTPA-BA) + 3TODGA + 3H+ + 3NO3−  ⇔  M(TODGA)3(NO3)3 + 3H-DTPA-BA is presumed. The high concentrations of TODGA and DTPA-BA at high pH lead to high SF(Ln/An). Considering their D values and SF, multi-step extraction was carried out to separation An and Ln. After the optimal calculation, using 0.3 M TODGA/n-dodecane and 0.5 M DTPA-BA in 1 M HNO3,5 steps of aqueous phase with metal, 7 steps of aqueous phase without metal, and 12  steps of organic phase gave satisfactory separation between Ln and An. From the experimental results, 95.3 % of Am and Cm can be removed from the organic phase with a 5–6 % co-removal of Nd and Sm. To achieve better separation, higher SF of Ln/An is needed.
Table 4: D and SF values of extraction in the TODGA-DTPA-BA-HNO3system.
Figure 10: Calculation results of recovery (%) of Nd and Am versus the initial metal concentrations at each extraction step using 0.3 MTODGA–0.5 M DTPA-BA in 1 M HNO3.(a) organic phase, (b) aqueous phase
Figure 11: Metal concentration ratio versus the initial value at each extraction step with 0.3 M TODGA/n-dodecane (12 steps) and 0.5 MDTPA-BA in 1 M HNO3 with metal (5 steps) and without metal (7 steps). (a) organic phase, (b) aqueous phase.
Table 5: Results of extraction and separation of An and Ln from Figures 10 and 11.
5 Novelty statement
(a) statement of why the work is novel.
1. Because we can separate Ln and An by solvent extraction method.
2. Because we use TODGA extractant and DTPA-BA masking agent, these reagents can be gasified after use and DTPA-BA is a novel reagent.
3. Because we obtain the good separation between An (95 % yield in aqueous phase) and Ln (95 % in theorganic phase) from nitric acid media.
Acknowledgment:
We would like to thank Mr. R. Ono and Prof. H. Shiroishi of the National Institute of Technology,Tokyo College for the calculation of metal concentrationat multi-step extraction, Dr. N. Kozai of the Japan AtomicEnergy Agency for the measurement by liquid scintillation counter, and Dr. Y. Ban for the useful discussion ofmulti-step extraction experiments. This study was partially supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research(No. 18H03404) from the Ministry of Education, Culture,Sports, Science and Technology, Japan for Ln extractions, and by a Grant-in-Aid for Challenging Research(Exploratory, 18K19043) by the Japan Society for thePromotion of Science for An extractions.
