<title>Development of calculation methodology for estimation of radionuclide composition in wastes generated at Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station</title>
<author>Sugiyama; Nakabayashi; Koma; Takahatake; Tsukamoto</author>
<Affiliation> Nuclear Technology Research Laboratory , Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry , Tokyo , Japan; Collaborative Laboratories for Advanced Decommissioning Science , Japan Atomic Energy Agency/International Research Institute for Nuclear Decommissioning , Ibaraki , Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2019.1595765</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00223131.2019.1595765</URL>
ABSTRACT
A calculation methodology for estimating the radionuclide composition in the wastes generated at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station has been developed by constructing a skeleton overview of the distribution of radionuclides considering the material balance in the system and calculation flowcharts of the transportation of radionuclides into the wastes. The wastes have a distinctive feature that their level of contamination includes considerable uncertainties because the process behind the contamination with the radionuclides released from the damaged fuel during and after the accident is not yet fully understood. Here, the developed method can explicitly specify the intrinsic uncertainties as a band to be included in the estimated radionuclide composition in the wastes and can quantitatively describe the uncertainties by calibration using analytically measured data on actual waste samples collected at the site. Further studies to improve the quality of the calculation method, the introduction of a stochastic approach to describe uncertainties, and acquiring a quantitative understanding of the spatial distribution of radionuclides inside the reactor building are suggested as important steps toward reasonable and sustainable waste management as an integral part of the decommissioning of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station.
KEYWORDS: Radioactive waste;radionuclide composition;calculation methodology;radionuclide transport parameter;uncertainty;calibration
1. Introduction
Radioactive wastes generated at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station (hereafter ‘Fukushima Daiichi wastes’) have distinctive features compared with conventional radioactive wastes generated during the normal operation of nuclear power plantsa, i.e. they are contaminated with the radionuclides released from the damaged fuel during and after the accident, and the level of contamination includes considerable uncertainties in the species and concentrations of radionuclides in addition to the large quantity of contamination. Moreover, the process behind the contamination is not yet fully understood.
Although sampling and analysis of the Fukushima Daiichi wastes have been progressing [1–4], the analytical data on the radionuclide composition in the wastes are still limited in terms of the categories of wastes and the amount of data. Therefore, a calculation model is necessary to establish a dataset of the radionuclide composition in the wastes for the strategic planning of waste management including the processing, packaging, and safe disposal of radioactive wastes.
In this paper, an overview of the development of a methodology for estimating the radionuclide composition in the Fukushima Daiichi wastes is provided. It consists of flowcharts for calculating the radionuclide composition of the Fukushima Daiichi wastes on the basis of an overview of the distribution of radionuclides as a result of the accident considering the material balance in the system. It is essential to specify the intrinsic uncertainties included in the calculation and improve the accuracy of the estimation of the radionuclide composition in the wastes through the accumulation of analytical data on actual waste samples.
2. Development of methodology for estimation of radionuclide composition in waste
2.1. Overview of distribution of radionuclides within Fukushima Daiichi wastes
The calculation method developed in this study consists of flowcharts for calculating the transportation of radionuclides into various kinds of wastes generated on the basis of an overview of the radionuclide distribution within the Fukushima Daiichi site, as shown in Figure 1. During the accident, damaged fuels were melted and then mixed with the surrounding core internal materials, and the released radionuclides were distributed and deposited throughout the reactor building. Then part of the radionuclides were released outside the reactor building, contaminating rubble, soil, and trees within and outside the site. Some of the radionuclides inside the reactor building have leached into the cooling water, and various secondary wastes, spent adsorption vessels, and sludge are being generated from the contaminated water treatment system.
Figure 1. Overview of distribution of radionuclides in wastes within the Fukushima Daiichi site.
Note that we have to pay attention to avoid excessive conservativeness in the estimation of the radionuclide composition in the wastes for practical and reasonable planning of the waste management by keeping in mind that we are managing the radionuclides from three damaged cores (Units #1, #2, and #3).
2.2. Quantification of radionuclide transport parameters
The source of the contamination was the radionuclide inventory in the damaged fuels in the three reactor cores, which was uncontrollably released and distributed within and outside of the site. As mentioned above, the process behind the contamination is not yet fully understood. Therefore, some assumptions to describe the release and distribution of the radionuclides have to be made in the calculation of the radionuclide composition in the wastes, which introduce various uncertainties in the estimation.
The calculation method in this study considers the implicit uncertainties identified in Figure 1. Among these uncertainties, the release fraction of radionuclides inside and outside the reactor building and the leaching fraction of radionuclides into the cooling water are the most important and contain large uncertainties. These radionuclide transport parameters are estimated quantitatively in the calculation model by referring to currently available knowledge and information including analytically measured data on actual waste samples. In this subsection, the process to quantify the radionuclide transport parameters is described, taking the calibration process of the release fractions inside the reactor building as an example.
The estimated release fractions of radionuclides inside the reactor building are shown in Figure 2 and the radionuclide groups shown in Figure 2 are defined in Table 1. For the release of cesium-137, the uncertainty of the release fraction was set as a band by referring to the range of the data in previous reports and papers on severe-accident assessments (2.2 × 10−3–1.0 × 100) [5–9], although the conditions for the literature data will not be consistent with those for the Fukushima Daiichi case because it is impossible to measure the total amount of released radioactive cesium. Here, a reference value of 0.6 given in NUREG-1465 is selected for the release fraction of cesium-137 inside the reactor building considering that it was given as a representative value of the mean fraction of the reactor core (damaged fuel) released into the containment vessel by examining a set of severe-accident sequences for light-water reactors in the United States [5]. Note that the term ‘reference value’ or ‘reference case’ intends to describe a reference used as a basis for investigations in our project rather than an attempt to predict the most probable value for the radionuclide composition in the wastes and that the band and the reference value of the release fraction of cesium-137 inside the reactor building might be updated when further data are available in investigations on severe-accident assessments of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station.
Table 1. Radionuclide groups used to estimate the release fractions in the modeling calculation.
Figure 2. Estimated release fractions of radionuclides inside the reactor building.
For the radionuclides other than cesium-137, the release fractions are calibrated with the available analytically measured transport ratio of radionuclides in the contaminant samples of rubble, boring cores, and stripped paint collected from the walls inside the building [4,10–12]. The transport ratio is defined as the ratio of the transported fraction of the radionuclide of interest to the transported fraction of the standard radionuclide (cesium-137 in this study), as described by Equation (1) [13].
Tx=Nx,sample/Nx,sourceNstd, sample/Nstd,source=cx,sample/cstd,sampleAx, source/Astd,source(1)
Here, N is the number of atoms, c is the activity concentration, A is the activity, and the subscripts x and std are the nuclide of interest and the standard nuclide (cesium-137), respectively. The transport ratio can be calculated using the analytically measured activity concentration in the waste samples and the activity in the sourceb estimated on the basis of a burn-up calculation. In this study, cesium-137 is selected as the standard radionuclide because more analytically measured data are available for cesium-137 than for the other radionuclides owing to the ease of measurement of its gamma rays.
Then the release fractions are calculated by multiplying the reference value of the release fraction of cesium-137 by the maximum and minimum values of the transport ratio of each element group [4,10–12] shown in Figure 3. The set of release fractions obtained on the basis of the reference value of the release fraction of cesium-137 is referred to as the ‘reference case band’ in Figure 2. The reference case band of the estimated release fractions of radionuclides inside the reactor building is in reasonable agreement with the literature data [5–9], but the modeling calculation gives a lower range of the release fraction for the lanthanides/actinides group. Also, a conservative range of the release fractions of radionuclides, referred to as the ‘uncertainty case band,’ is calculated by multiplying the maximum and minimum values of the band of the release fraction of cesium-137 by the maximum and minimum values of the transport ratio of each element group.
The release fractions of radionuclides outside the reactor building, which are calibrated with the measured radionuclide transport ratio in rubble, soil, and trees outside the reactor building [4,14–17], are shown in Figure 4. The range of the uncertainty in the release fraction of cesium-137 is estimated by referring to the distribution of the literature data [18] of severe-accident assessments (6–30 PBq), and the value of 10 PBq estimated by TEPCO, which is about the average of the literature data, is selected as a reference value. Note that the band and the reference value of the release fraction of cesium-137 outside the reactor building might be updated when further data are available from severe-accident assessments. The reference case band of the estimated release fractions is in reasonable agreement with the literature data [19,20] except for the transition metals, for which the modeling-estimated release fraction is considerably larger than the literature data.
Figure 4. Estimated release fractions of radionuclides outside the reactor building.
The leaching fractions of radionuclides in the cooling water, which are calibrated with the measured radionuclide concentrations in the contaminated water [4,12,17,21–23], are shown in Figure 5c, and the radionuclide groups shown in Figure 5 are defined in Table 2. The range of the uncertainty in the leaching fraction of cesium-137 is estimated by referring to the analyzed data on the contaminated water from 28 June 2011 to 30 March 2017 [24,25].
Table 2. Radionuclide groups used to estimate the leaching fractions in the modeling calculation.
The sets of the decontamination factors (DFs) of the decontamination devices and the multi-radionuclide removal system (MRRS) are selected on the basis of the measured concentrations of radionuclides in the contaminated water prior to each step and in the effluent considering the conceptual design of the contaminated water treatment system. An example of DFs is given in Table 3.
Table 3. Sets of decontamination factors of the adsorbent in the second cesium adsorption device.
Note that there is an uncertainty in the burn-up calculation (uncertainty (a) in Figure 1); therefore, the results of two sets of burn-up calculat-ions using ORIGEN-ARP and ORIGEN-2.2 with JENDL-3.3 [26] are used in this study to describe the uncertainty in the source.
2.3. Flowcharts for calculating radionuclide composition in waste
Flowcharts for calculating the radionuclide composition in waste are extracted from the overview of the distribution of radionuclides in the system shown in Figure 1. In this paper, the flowchart used to calculate the radionuclide composition in the secondary wastes from the water treatment system is given in Figure 6 as an example of a calculation flowchart developed in this study.
Figure 6. Flowchart for calculating radionuclide composition in the secondary wastes from the water treatment system.
In the first step, the radionuclide inventory of the damaged fuel and the materials inside the irradiated core is estimated by a burn-up calculation. Then the release of radionuclides outside the reactor building is calculated to obtain the composition of radionuclides inside the building, and the composition of radionuclides in the contaminated water is estimated by referring to the leaching fractions of radionuclides into the cooling water. To calculate the radionuclide composition of each waste and the effluent in the contaminated water treatment system, a set of decontamination factors of the adsorption vessels (e.g. Table 3) and the decontamination devices is employed to estimate the transportation of radionuclides from the contaminated water to each medium.
In the calculation of the radionuclide composition in the secondary wastes from the water treatment system, the uncertainties in the radionuclide inventory of the fuel and the core internal material obtained by burn-up calculations (uncertainty (a) in Figure 1), the release fractions of radionuclides outside the reactor building (c), the leaching fractions of radionuclides into the cooling water (d), and the decontamination factors of adsorbents (e) are included explicitly, as shown in Figure 6, and provide a certain level of uncertainty in the estimation of the radionuclide composition in the wastes.
3. Estimation of radionuclide composition in waste
The uncertainty of the radionuclide composition in the wastes can be estimated using the same concept as that in the calibration process of the radionuclide transport parameters. The calculation results are described in two ways, as the reference case and the uncertainty case. In the reference case, the radionuclide composition in the wastes is calculated using the radionuclide transport parameters of the reference case. A conservative estimation of the radionuclide composition in the wastes is obtained using the radionuclide transport parameters of the uncertainty case. In both cases, the calculation result can be described as a band giving the range of uncertainty based on the current knowledge and information available so far.
Two examples of the modeling estimation of the radionuclide composition in the spent adsorption vessel of the cesium adsorption device and in the carbonate precipitate slurry from the MRRS are given in Figures 7 and 8, respectively, which are compared with the radionuclide compositions in wastes estimated using analytically measured data [11,27–29]. It is concluded that the newly developed methodology of the modeling calculation can reasonably describe the process of decontamination in the water treatment system and provide a preliminary data set of the radionuclide composition in the wastes for strategic planning of waste management. However, it is recognized that there is a considerable degree of uncertainty in the estimated radionuclide composition in the wastes because the radionuclide transport parameters in the model contain a wide range of uncertainty and that it is an intrinsic feature of the Fukushima Daiichi wastes that the level of contamination includes a considerable range of uncertainties in the species and the concentrations of radionuclides in them. For the practical and reasonable management of the Fukushima Daiichi wastes, more analytical data of actual waste samples are needed to discuss the validity of the calculation model and improve the quality of the waste inventory estimation.
Figure 7. Modeling-estimated composition of radionuclides in spent adsorption vessel of the cesium adsorption device.
Figure 8. Modeling-estimated composition of radionuclides in carbonate precipitate slurry from the multi-radionuclide removal system.
Note that the estimated concentration of tritium in the secondary wastes is shown in Figures 7 and 8, although tritium has not been expected to be adsorbed by any of the devices in the contaminated water treatment system. This is because the calculation model considers the uncertainty in the decontamination factors shown in Table 3 to describe the possibility of contamination with the residual contaminated water in the devices.
4. Discussion for improvement of calculation methodology
The wide range of uncertainty in the radionuclide composition estimated above is an intrinsic feature of the Fukushima Daiichi wastes as they were contaminated with radionuclides released and distributed uncontrollably during the accident. Therefore, the quality of the modeling calculation can be increased by improving the confidence in the width of uncertainty in the radionuclide composition, rather than by simply reducing the uncertainty. In this section, a few examples of future expected developments are discussed.
In the preliminary phase of the modeling study, the amount of analytically measured data of the waste samples is still limited and the radionuclide transport parameters can be obtained as a band (range of values) from a calculation by referring to the maximum and minimum values in the range of analytical data, as shown in Figures 2–5. The introduction of a stochastic approach to the calculation methodology will be an effective means of discussing the accuracy and confidence in the estimation in a quantitative manner. The result of a preliminary investigation employing a stochastic approach in the calculation methodology is shown in Figure 9. It was found that, if the distribution of the measured transport ratios is compiled as an appropriate histogram, the radionuclide transport parameters can be described as a log-normal distributiond by speculating that the aerosol of released radionuclides exhibits a log-normal particle frequency distribution because the log-normal distribution is a function that has been used to describe size distributions of particle properties in atmospheric aerosols [30]. In addition, the radionuclide transport parameters could be investigated separately for each reactor (Units #1, #2, and #3), which is suggested for the transition metals and lanthanides/actinides in Figure 3. (In other words, the uncertainty in the transport parameters contains the difference between the units, which broadens the range of uncertainty.) Introducing a stochastic approach will enable distributional information on the radionuclide composition in the wastes and the difference between the units to be obtained. Therefore, the progressive accumulation of analytical data on waste samples collected at the site is expected to yield a high-quality frequency distribution.
Figure 3. Analytically measured transport ratios in the contaminant samples inside the reactor building.
The improvement of the quality of the estimation of the radionuclide composition in the wastes may primarily depend on the calibration of the release fractions of radionuclides inside the reactor building as it is the starting point of the modeling calculation (Figure 1). The representativeness of the data used for the calibration of the release fractions of radionuclides inside the reactor building should be ensured; however, only relatively mildly contaminated samples have been collected and analyzed so far. The sampling and analysis of highly contaminated waste samples are expected to improve the accuracy of the modeling calculation.
Furthermore, the quantitative spatial distribution of radionuclides inside the building should be obtained to upgrade the data set of the radionuclide composition in the wastes. In the current calculation method, the spatial distribution of radionuclides inside the building is simply described by only three categories, as shown in Figure 1 (uncertainty (f)), by referring to a severe-accident assessment [19]. A strategic survey with more detailed quantitative contamination mapping inside the building and the sampling and analysis of rubble and boring cores are expected to make the management of the large volume of contaminants generated in the process toward decommissioning the damaged reactor buildings more reasonable and practical in the future, along with the application of clearance and appropriate classification for disposal. The quantitative spatial distribution will also be upgraded by interactive investigation with the severe-accident assessment.
5. Conclusion
A calculation method for estimating radionuclide composition in the Fukushima Daiichi wastes has been developed, in which an overview of the transportation and consequent distribution of radionuclides released during and after the accident is considered. It is crucial to explicitly describe the uncertainty in the calculation on the basis of current knowledge and information, including analytically measured data of contaminant samples collected at the site.
The methodology has been developed by constructing calculation flowcharts of the transportation of radionuclides into the wastes so that a preliminary dataset of the radionuclide composition in the wastes can be provided for waste management. However, further investigation is necessary to improve the quality of the calculation method by iterating modeling calculations and analytical measurements.
a The radioactivity in the radioactive wastes generated during the normal operation of nuclear power plants mainly originates from activated materials (irradiated concrete, metal, radioactive corrosion products, etc.).
b The source is the radionuclide inventory in the fuels and irradiated core internal materials used for the calibration of release fractions inside and outside the reactor building. In the calibration of the leaching fractions of radionuclides into the cooling water, the source is the radionuclide inventory remaining inside the reactor building, which is estimated using the release fractions of radionuclides outside the reactor building.
c Figure 5 shows an example of the leaching fraction calculated with the minimum value in the reference case band of the release fraction outside the reactor building.
Figure 5. Estimated leaching fractions of radionuclides in the cooling water.
d A preliminary investigation was carried out on the dependence of the log intervals on the description of the distribution of the transport ratio and an appropriate interval was found for each case to describe the radionuclide transport parameters as a log-normal distribution. Preliminary calculations based on the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test were also carried out to confirm that the null hypothesis of the log-normal distribution of the transport ratio was not rejected for all cases in Figure 9.
Figure 9. Preliminary stochastic investigation of transport ratio inside the reactor building.
Acknowledgments
This paper includes part of the results from works under the subsidy program “Project of Decommissioning and Contaminated Water Management” conducted by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. The authors wish to thank Dr. Y. Nauchi for the burn-up calculation using ORIGEN-ARP.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
