<title>Effect of Nitride Nuclear Fuel Structure and Phase Composition on Fuel-Rod Life</title>
<author>M. P. Krivov; G. A. Kireev; A. V. Tenishev</author>
<Affiliation>Bochvar High-Technology Research Institute of Inorganic Materials (VNIINM),Moscow,Russia; National Research Nuclear University MEPhI (Moscow Engineering Physics Institute),Moscow,Russia</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Atomic Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer Nature </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-019-00579-1</DOI>
<URL>http://sci-hub.ren/10.1007/s10512-019-00579-1</URL>
The behavior of mixed uranium-plutonium nitride fuel and uranium nitride was studied by means of thermogravimetry at high temperatures (to 2173 K) in a helium fl ow. The mass loss of the nitride samples
was found in the low temperature range (<1773 K), which is not associated with decomposition of uranium or plutonium mononitrides. The mass loss occurs in two stages and is accompanied by the release of nitrogen. It is shown that nitride fuel can contain up to several percent of uranium sesquinitride U2N3,which decomposes in the indicated temperature range and can strongly affect pellet integrity and fuel-rod life during operation.
The use in BREST-type fast reactors of mixed uranium-plutonium nitride fuel with high density and thermal conductivity makes it possible to secure the specifi ed neutron physical and thermohydraulic properties of the fuel. As a result of the high density >12 g/cm3 , breeding ratios BR ~ 1.06 are reached without uranium blankets and operation in an equilibrium regime with the minimum reactivity is possible. The low fuel temperature contributes to the prevention of overheating and destruction of the cladding with accidental loss of cooling and insertion of reactivity [1].
Despite its advantages, nitride fuel is not free of drawbacks: high rate of swelling, low creep rate, absence of chemical inertness with respect to oxygen and water, production of 14C, high-purity requirements in terms of impurities (oxygen and carbon), and thermochemical instability, as a result of which the nitride can decompose into the metal of the corresponding actinide and nitrogen [2]. For this reason, in order to use nitride fuel it is necessary to prove that its temperature will not exceed the decomposition limit or decomposition will not lead to fuel-rod depressurization. It is also necessary to take account of the fact that in the uranium-nitrogen system there are four phases of uranium nitrides, which upon loss of vacuum are unstable and dissociate without reaching the melting temperature. In the manufacture of mononitride fuel based on uranium or uranium-plutonium mixture, above-stoichiometry nitrogen can be present in the fi nal product [3]. Since uranium and plutonium mononitride are stoichio tric compounds at room temperature, the nitride fuel pellets will contain excess nitrogen in the form of individual phases of higher uranium nitrides, which are insoluble in the mixed uranium plutonium nitride fuel [4]. The use of nitride fuel containing excess nitrogen can result in loss of integrity of fuel-kernel pellets and nitriding of the fuel-rod cladding.
In the present work, we studied samples of nitride fuel for the presence in them of phases of higher uranium nitrides, and we studied the behavior of these phases at the working temperature of the fuel in a reactor.
Experimental part. Samples with plutonium mass fractions 5.9, 9.8, 12, 20, and 50% in the sum of uranium and plutonium were fabricated from a mixture of uranium and plutonium mononitrides obtained from the initial dioxide by carbothermal synthesis in a dry nitrogen atmosphere (H2O, O2 – ≤100 ppm each). Nitride synthesis and fabrication of disks were performed by the procedure described in [5, 6].
The initial materials (uranium and plutonium dioxides, K-354 type technical carbon) were mixed in a prescribed ratio in an A-150 vortex layer apparatus. Prior to carbothermal synthesis the mixture of initial reagents was pre-pressed into cylindrical briquettes in order to achieve the fullest possible completion of the reaction and reduce dust losses, after which they were subjected to heat-treatment with isothermal soaking at 1773 K successively in a nitrogen fl ow and in a fl ow of a mixture of nitrogen with 8 vol.% hydrogen. Carbothermal reduction of the mixture of uranium and plutonium dioxides occurred in the nitrogen medium with formation of mixed mononitride; removal of residual carbon the it occurred in the mixture of nitrogen with hydrogen.
Next, the heat-treated nitride briquettes were pulverized in a PX-MFC 90 D hammer mill (Switzerland) and comminuted in the ABC-150 apparatus for 10 min. A dry lubricant was added to the comminuted nitride (to 0.5 wt.% of zinc stearate), and the mixture was homogenized in a turbulent mixer. Blanks in the form of pellets were pressed from the obtained powder under pressure 250–350 MPa. The pressed pellets were heat-treated in the fl ow of a mixture of nitrogen with 8 vol.% hydrogen with isothermal soaking at 2120 K for 2–20 h.
The inner diameter of the crucible in a Netzsch STA 449 F1 thermal analyzer (Germany) is equal to 6 mm, so that the 8 mm in diameter sintered nitride pellets were crushed into smaller 100–600 mg fragments.
Thermogravimetric studies of the mixed uranium plutonium nitride fuel were conducted in a fl ow of highly pure helium with the aid of a Netzsch STA 449 F1 thermal analyzer, combined with a quadrupole mass spectrometer for analyzing the gaseous atmosphere in the furnace. A MonoTorr (USA) heated purifying getter, which decreases the amount of impurities in helium to the level <1 ppb, was used for additional purifi cation of the helium.
A fragment of a nitride fuel pellet was placed into a tungsten crucible, which was placed on a sample holder with a tungsten-rhenium thermocouple. The experimental procedure included heating a sample in the tungsten furnace at a constant rate. Fuel with plutonium mass fraction 5.9, 9.8, 12, 20, and 50% in the sum of uranium and plutonium was used for the samples.
The following parameters were recorded in the experiment: the mass change and rate of mass change of the sample, the ion current recorded by the mass spectrometer corresponding mass-to-charge ratio 28 (nitrogen molecule N2), and the time dependence of the sample temperature.
TABLE 1. Mass Loss of Samples in the Low-Temperature Range In the investigations of the thermochemical stability, mass loss was found in all samples in the low temperature range (<1773 K), with the exception of the sample with plutonium mass fraction 50%. The mass loss occurs in two stages, which is refl ected by steps in the thermogravimetry curve, as well as by two nitrogen release peaks (Fig. 1). It is known that the mass loss in this region is not associated with decomposition of uranium or plutonium mononitride.
Such mass loss was not observed in samples of mixed uranium-plutonium mononitride with the composition (U0.5Pu0.5)N (Fig. 2). We can see that the sample mass does not deviate from zero, right up to the decomposition onset temperature (~2038 K). We can see in Fig. 1 that the mass loss in the low temperature range is small and equal to hundredths of a percent (Table 1). In samples with plutonium content 50 wt.%, nitrogen release and mass losses were not observed in the low temperature range.
Discussion. In the study of mixed uranium-plutonium nitride fuel by thermogravimetry, the mass loss of the samples was found in the low-temperature range, accompanied by the nitrogen release, which is not associated with decomposition of uranium or plutonium mononitrides. The mass losses in the low-temperature range occur in two stages – in the temperature interval 1100–1273 and 1373–1673 K, respectively. Since plutonium nitride possesses only one compound with nitrogen PuN, the mass losses in the low-temperature segment (<1773 K) could be associated with only the decomposition of higher uranium nitrides. It is well-known that four phases of uranium nitrides have been found in the uranium-nitrogen system:mononitride UN, cubic α-U2N3 and hexagonal β-U2N3 sesquinitride, and uranium dinitride UN2. Upon heating in vacuum,all of them are unstable and dissociate without reaching the melting temperature. In addition, the cubic and hexagonal U2N3 are not allotropic modifi cations of one and the same compound, but or inarily they are designated as α-U2N3 and β-U2N3.
Thus, the α-phase possesses a wide composition range UN1.54–UN1.75, the β-phase possesses the substoichiometric composition UN1.45–UN1.49. The α–β phase transition occurs above 2073 K. The nitride phase possesses the ratio N/U > 1.75, but it could not be obtained in the form of a stoichiometric compound [4]
TABLE 2. Content of Sesquinitride in Mixed Nitride Fuel According to Thermogravimetric Data
The mass loss in the low-temperature range corresponds to the decomposition of uranium sesquinitride to the mononitride according to the equation U2N3 → UN + 0.5N2. This process corresponds to decomposition of α-U2N3 into UN and
proceeds in vacuum at 1038 K [3]. For a hermetic fuel rod, this temperature can be higher, since upon heating the samples will
decompose in a closed system with a small free-volume fraction. In addition, the decomposition of the sesquinitride can possess an additional stage: the α–β transition above 1073 K, which is shown in Fig. 1.
Assuming uranium and plutonium mononitrides to be strictly stoichiometric compounds up to 1773 K and the released nitrogen bound with uranium in the form of the compound U2N3, the content of the sesquinitride in the decomposition
of nitride nuclear fuel can be calculated (Table 2).
The sesquinitride can form at the fi nal stage of fabrication of nitride fuel, namely upon cooling after the pellets sinter.
The pellets sinter in a nitrogen atmosphere, which is used to prevent decomposition of nitrides at high temperature. Upon cooling after sintering, the atmosphere is changed from nitrogen to argon and subsequent cooling occurs in an argon atmosphere. The residual nitrogen can enter into interaction with uranium mononitride and form a sesquinitride phase. The purity of the argon will also strongly infl uence the nitrogen content in the furnace during the change of atmosphere. Moreover, the nitrogen that is most diffi cult to remove is contained in the pores of the nitride fuel (the porosity of the fuel is equal to ~15%) and can remain there even with repeated replacement of the gas in the furnace volume.
The sesquinitride is insoluble in uranium mononitride and has a lower density, decomposes upon heating of the fuel in the reactor, and a portion of the nitrogen will escape beneath the fuel-rod cladding. Upon cooling of the fuel, which is possible during scheduled work, refueling, and other operations, the previously released nitrogen can once again enter into reaction with uranium mononitride and form a brittle sesquinitride phase. As a result of several decomposition–sesquinitride formation cycles, the integrity of the pellets will be destroyed, which can affect fuel-rod serviceability.
Conclusion. In the course of thermogravimetric tests of mixed uranium-plutonium nitride fuel with plutonium mass fraction 5.9, 9.8, 12, 20, and 50% in the sum of uranium and plutonium, the mass loss was found in the low-temperature range (<1773 K), accompanied by nitrogen release by all samples except fuel with the composition (U0.5Pu0.5)N. The mass loss is equal to hundredths of a percent of the sample mass and occurs in two stages. Mass loss occurs as a result of the decomposition of uranium sesquinitride in the nitride fuel. This process can infl uence the serviceability and operating life of fuel rods.
In this connection it is important to monitor the amount of residual sesquinitride that can be present in the nitride nuclear fuel.
