<title>Rod internal pressure of spent nuclear fuel and its effects on cladding degradation during dry storage</title>
<author>Ju-Seong Kim; Jong-Dae Hong; Yong-Sik Yang; Dong-Hak Kook</author>
<Affiliation>Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 989-111 Daedeokdae-Ro, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 34057, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1016/j.jnucmat.2017.05.047</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311516312454</URL>
Abstract
Temperature and hoop stress limits have been used to prevent the gross rupture of spent nuclear fuel during dry storage. The stress due to rod internal pressure can induce cladding degradation such as creep, hydride reorientation, and delayed hydride cracking. Creep is a self-limiting phenomenon in a dry storage system; in contrast, hydride reorientation and delayed hydride cracking are potential degradation mechanisms activated at low temperatures when the cladding material is brittle. In this work, a conservative rod internal pressure and corresponding hoop stress were calculated using FRAPCON-4.0 fuel performance code. Based on the hoop stresses during storage, a study on the onset of hydride reorientation and delayed hydride cracking in spent nuclear fuel was conducted under the current storage guidelines. Hydride reorientation is hard to occur in most of the low burn-up fuel while some high burn-up fuel can experience hydride reorientation, but their effect may not be significant. On the other hand, delayed hydride cracking will not occur in spent nuclear fuel from pressurized water reactor; however, there is a lack of confirmatory data on threshold intensity factor for delayed hydride cracking and crack size distribution in the fuel.
Keywords:Dry storage;Degradation;Rod internal pressure;Hoop stress;Hydride reorientation;Delayed hydride crackingS;pent nuclear fuel
1. Introduction
In general, spent nuclear fuels (SNFs) are burned in a nuclear reactor for around 4.5 years. As of 2013, the number of fuel assemblies (FAs) from pressurized water reactor (PWR) stored in wet storage at a nuclear power plant in Korea is around 10500. Among them, the average burn-up of FAs lower than 45 GWd/tU is about 85%. Each of the fuel assemblies has an intrinsic burn-up, which is mainly dependent upon the loading pattern and power history. The burn-up level of SNF can be simply classified into two groups: high burn-up fuel (HBU) is greater than the average fuel assembly (FA) burn-up of 45 GWd/tU, and low burn-up (LBU) fuel is equal to or less than that of 45 GWd/tU. Recently, the storage of SNF from PWRs in Korea has become a critical issue owing to the expected saturation of wet storage capacity in the near future. As an alternative, dry storage is considered to be a realistic option prior to the pyro-processing or final disposal of the SNFs.
The technical storage criteria of the United States (US) on spent fuel in dry storage are based on 10 CFR 72. By this regulation, the SNF must be protected against a gross rupture and maintain its retrievability indicating that the integrity of the SNF will remain intact during a short-term storage operation, long-term storage, and even transportation. In order to preclude creep rupture of the cladding during dry storage, temperature limit of the cladding was proposed in NUREG-1536 [1]. At that time, creep was a primary failure mechanism during dry storage. The US Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) recommended a specific peak cladding temperature during normal storage dependent upon the fuel burn-up and cooling period in wet storage, and also proposed a temperature limit of 570 °C under off-normal and accident conditions. As an accumulation of creep data on irradiated cladding, the NRC proposed 1% creep strain of cladding instead of the peak temperature of cladding in ISG-11 rev. 1 [2]. However, in ISG-11 rev. 2 [3], the NRC tentatively concluded that creep rupture is hard to occur under the dry storage conditions and cannot severely degrade the integrity of cladding if the peak cladding temperature can be maintained below 400 °C, but they considered the detrimental effects of hydride reorientation (HR) on the ductility. In their third revision, ISG-11 rev. 3 [4], NRC limits the number of thermal cycles to less than 10 to prevent HR in cladding material; moreover, they allow high temperature greater than 400 °C for LBU fuel if the cladding stress is equal to or less than 90 MPa [5]. In other words, the current storage guidelines of NRC is maintaining the cladding hoop stress of less than 90 MPa for the LBU fuel and a peak cladding temperature of less than 400 °C for the HBU fuel [5].
The current lifetime of the dry storage system in the US is up to 80 years: however, the US has considered very long-term storage beyond 120 years and even up to 300 years including the wet storage period. As the needs of very long-term storage of spent nuclear fuel increase, NRC [6], the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) [7], Department of Energy (DOE) [8] and Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board (NWTRB) [9] reviewed the operable degradation mechanisms in SNF during long-term dry storage and analyzed a technical gap. In their reports, creep is recognized as a minor degradation mechanism because the creep is a self-limiting mechanism in the dry storage system. On the other hand, hydrogen effects, i.e., HR, hydride embrittlement, and delayed hydride cracking (DHC) have been pronounced as major degradation mechanisms during storage. DHC is a time-dependent degradation phenomenon degrading the integrity of fuel cladding with a gross rupture. DHC has been suspected as a failure mechanism of Zr-2.5Nb [10], [11] and Zircaloy-2; in contrast, DHC has not been observed in PWR cladding material, and thus the onset of DHC was not of interests for PWR cladding. However, owing to the extension of the storage period, hydride effects including DHC are re-considered in PWR cladding as major potential degradation mechanisms [12]. HR is not a direct failure mechanism but it can degrade the integrity of material with even a small hydrogen concentration. HR occurs when excessive stress (so-called threshold stress) and soluble hydrogen exist in cladding during a cool-down. Unfortunately, some of the hoop stresses of HBU cladding may be close to the threshold stress for HR under the dry storage condition; therefore, most of the concern of HR is related to the possibility of the onset of HR and their effects on the material ductility.
The objectives of this study are to assess which failure mechanisms can deteriorate the cladding integrity, and what guidelines will be required for the mitigation of the major potential degradation in SNF cladding. In dry storage, there are no controllable variables except temperature due to the intrinsic passive storage system, and thus, the RIP and the corresponding hoop stress of cladding at the initial dry storage have a prime importance in the assessment of the integrity of SNFs. However, few available data on RIP at high temperatures and corresponding hoop stress have been presented in literature because we can measure RIP only in a hot cell through a perforation. In this study, the maximum RIP and hoop stresses of Korean SNFs were calculated using FRAPCON-4.0 with certain assumptions. Subsequently, the onset of HR and DHC was discussed based on the current guidelines of the NRC.
2. Calculation of rod internal pressure and corresponding hoop stress of Korean spent nuclear fuel
In this study, RIPs and hoop stress of SNF were calculated using FRAPCON-4.0. FRAPCON is a fuel performance evaluation code during steady-state operation of light water reactors, which calculates rod internal pressure, deformation of cladding, cladding oxidation and pellet cladding mechanical interaction (PCMI). The previous version, FRAPCON-3, had been steadily updated [13], [14], [15], and recently, FRAPCON-4.0 was released [16].
In the RIP calculation, two types of PWR fuel rod designs were considered: 16 × 16 Combustion Engineering (CE), and 17 × 17 Westinghouse (WH) types, whose design parameters are given in Table 1. The major differences in design parameters of the fuel are plenum length and initially charged helium pressure. Power history of the fuel rod is a prerequisite for RIP calculation. The previous study showed that power history can affect the RIP significantly at high burn-up [17]. In particular, the release of fission gases can be increased when the heat generation rate of fuel in the last cycle is high. It is obvious that hoop stress of SNF cladding value is the most conservative when RIP is equal to the system pressure at the end of reactor operation. The power histories used in this study are presented in Fig. 1. For conservative RIP calculation, case A power history was used for which the linear heat generation rate (LHGR) of last cycle operation is higher; however, RIP can exceed the system pressure at a higher burn-up greater than 50 GWd/tU when case A power history was used. In that case, we used case B power history and adjusted the RIP around the system pressure of 15.5 MPa at the end of cycle (EOC) using the bias option in the code. In order to simulate five years wet storage and vacuum drying operation prior to dry storage, the cladding temperature was set at 25 °C for five years and the cladding temperature was then changed to 400 °C.
Table 1. Design parameters of fuel rods.
Fig. 1. Power histories of a fuel rod used in rod internal pressure calculation.
The RIP calculation was conducted with a burn-up range of 30–60 GWd/tU with some assumptions. Firstly, uniform temperature in the entire fuel rod was assumed for the stress calculation during the vacuum drying operation, i.e., no axial temperature variation in the axial direction. The RIP of SNF is predominantly dependent upon the plenum volume and its temperature, but generally, the plenum position is not the peak temperature location in dry storage operation; therefore, non-uniform temperature distribution can give best-estimate results but a uniform temperature assumption is rather conservative in evaluating the hoop stress of the cladding. Secondly, additional gas release and swelling due to helium production is not considered after the discharging. A recent study [18] showed that both the fuel swelling due to helium and the release of helium might be negligible during the dry storage period if the fuel temperature is maintained below 700 K, and thus, considering the storage temperature history the release of helium might be negligible. Thirdly, we assumed open gap regime of the fuel rod. Practically, the gap between fuel and cladding is closed during the reactor operation, and the bonding with fuel and cladding is observed in SNF; however, the gap will be re-open due to outward creep deformation.
3. Rod internal pressure and corresponding hoop stress of spent nuclear fuel
Recently EPRI analyzed the non-proprietary RIP data independent of fuel type. According to their results, RIP values tend to begin to rise exponentially at 60 GWd/tU and following empirical correlation between RIP and burn-up was proposed for burn-up less than 60 GWd/tU.
@However, the given RIP does not represent the conservative value. Fig. 2 shows the calculated RIP with reference data [17], [19].
Fig. 2. Calculated RIP of spent nuclear fuel at room temperature.
As shown in the figure, RIP of WH is lower than that of CE, and data of EPRI at LBU. It is thought that initial charging pressure is more dominant than released fission gas at LBU. The values of the RIP steadily increase with an increase in burn-up and RIP of 60 GWd/tU can reach around 5.8 MPa at 25 °C. RIP is in inverse proportion to the void volume and proportional to the release of fission gas. Fig. 3 shows the history of the void volume of 60 GWd/tU. At the beginning of cycle, as shown in the figure, the void volume of the rod increases due to the densification of fuel, and then void volume of the rod slowly decreases with time during the first cycle operation due to cladding creep. During the second cycle operation, the void volume of the rod decreases due to the axial extension of cladding and release of fission gas accelerated in this cycle when LHGR is the highest. After fuel discharging, contraction of fuel is larger than cladding because of smaller thermal expansion, and irradiation growth of cladding. RIP at 25 °C is around 5.8 MPa, which approximately corresponds to system pressure of 15.5 MPa at reactor operation condition, which may be the most conservative situation.
Fig. 3. Void volume with (a) axial extension of fuel, cladding, and (b) RIP.
Fig. 4 shows the RIP and hoop stress of the SNFs at 400 °C. The proposed hoop stress is not a local stress from PCMI and cladding ovality but the average hoop stress using the thin wall theory can be applied in cladding geometry, and as a result, the hoop stress of cladding can be presented as below:
where σθ is the hoop stress, ri and ro are the inner and outer radii of the cladding, Pi and Po are the internal and external rod pressures, and t is the effective cladding thickness (mm). The effective cladding thickness is the reduced thickness considering the Pilling-Bedworth ratio as a result of coolant corrosion. Ideal ratio of RIP,  is 2.257 if the void volume is constant; however, reduced void volume due to difference of thermal expansion of pellet and cladding induce roughly 5% increase in ideal ratio of RIP at 400 °C. On the other hand, so called hoop stress factor (HSF), , was utilized to calculate hoop stress roughly and easily. As-manufactured HSF of WH and CE are 7.33 and 6.46; however, unrecoverable dimensional change in cladding such as creep and irradiation growth changes the HSF; moreover, increase in oxide thickness with burn-up increases HSF. The calculated local HSF of WH and CE can increase to 8.17 and 7.24 at 60 GWd/tU, respectively. As a result, the maximum hoop stresses of the both fuels below 50 GWd/tU at 400 °C are less than 90 MPa, but hoop stress can exceed 90 MPa at HBU, in the case of WH, the maximum hoop stress in cladding can reach 110 MPa.
Fig. 4. Calculated RIP and hoop stress at 400 °C: (a) WH, and (b) CE.
4. Cladding degradations during dry storage
4.1. Hydride reorientation in spent nuclear fuel
It should be noted that the current storage guidelines of NRC for LBU fuel allows high temperature greater than 400 °C, if the hoop stress of cladding is equal to or less than 90 MPa. As aforementioned, high burn-up fuel (HBU) is greater than the average fuel assembly (FA) burn-up of 45 GWd/tU, and low burn-up (LBU) fuel is equal to or less than that of 45 GWd/tU. Therefore, it is ambiguous to categorize individual fuel rods into HBU and LBU because the average FA burn-up of 45 GWd/tU can contain individual fuels rods ranging from 40 to 50 GWd/tU. Summarily, LBU FA of 44 GWd/tU may contain a plenty of 50 GWd/tU fuel rods. Thus, the intersectional burn-up exists between LBU and HBU fuels.
If the cladding temperature can be maintained below 400 °C, LBU fuel has a substantial temperature margin because the hoop stress of LBU fuel is far below 90 MPa at 400 °C as shown in Fig. 4. However, recent experimental studies [20], [21] showed that the threshold stress for HR is lower than 90 MPa [22] and revealed that the threshold stress decreases with an increase in temperature. Therefore, whether the reorientation occurs or not is an interesting issue for LBU fuel when the peak temperature is greater than 400 °C. Thus, once again, the temperature beyond the 400 °C with maintaining hoop stress less than 90 MPa is allowed for LBU. The allowable temperatures can be calculated based on the proposed hoop stress in Fig. 2. Fig. 5 shows the hoop stress range for WH type fuel and threshold stress for HR [20]. The lines of burn-up correspond to the hoop stresses at the temperatures. In this figure, the hoop stress over the threshold line for HR indicates that HR can occur; more precisely, HR occurs during cool-down below the terminal solid solubility for precipitation (TSSP) temperatures [20], and thus, HR only can occur between TSSP temperature and the intersection point that the threshold line and hoop stress line are crossed. The expected regime of occurrence of HR is specified in Fig. 5. Considering the TSS of hydrogen in Zircaloy-4 at allowable temperature ranges and the hydrogen concentration in 40–50 GWd/tU [23], [24], significant HR can occur but which depends on the hydrogen concentration in the cladding, allowable temperature and threshold stress. For instance, in the case of 50 GWd/tU, the allowable temperature of cladding (472 °C) slowly cooled to a lower temperature but hydride reorientation will not occur until the temperature goes down to the TSSP temperature (∼407 °C). During a subsequent cooling, HR occurs between the TSSP temperature (407 °C) and the intersection point (∼367 °C). Given that the hydrogen solubility at the temperatures [25], around 100 wppm of hydrogen can be involved in HR.
Fig. 5. Calculated hoop stress corresponding to temperature of cladding during dry storage for WH type fuel and threshold stress for hydride reorientation.
On the other hand, the onset of HR will barely occur at a burn-up of less than 40 GWd/tU due to a lack of soluble hydrogen at high temperatures. In the light of this description, HR would be unlikely to occur for LBU fuel if the peak temperature is maintained below 430 °C.
Similarly, HR on HBU SNF may not be severe though the hoop stress of the HBU SNFs (>50 GWd/tU) is greater than 90 MPa because hydrogen concentration that can involve HR may be less than 50 wppm when the peak hoop stress is 110 MPa at 400 °C. However, if the hoop stress is far greater than 110 MPa a significant hydride reorientation can occur. Recent ductility test results of HBU spent nuclear cladding showed a good accordance with this explanation. Zircaloy-4 cladding cooled with hoop stress of 110 MPa showed ductile failure at all the test temperatures; in contrast, the cladding cooled with hoop stress of 140 MPa showed brittle failure at low temperatures [26], [27]. However, such prediction may not be applicable for the advanced zirconium alloys cladding such as Zirlo, M5, and Hana because hydride reorientation is a function of hydrogen concentration, TSS of hydrogen in zirconium alloys and cladding microstructure (cold-worked and stress-relieved or partially recrystallized or recrystallized annealed). For instance, M5 seems to be more susceptible to HR than Zircaloy-4 [28] due to its microstructure, but absorbed hydrogen concentration is much lower than that of Zircaloy-4.
4.2. Discussions on possibility of onset of delayed hydride cracking in Zircaloy-4 cladding
It seems that zirconium alloys are immune to DHC at high temperatures above 350 °C [29], and thus DHC may not be a factor affecting the current regulation guidelines; however, zirconium alloys are susceptible to DHC at low temperatures, as well as to other hydrogen effects. The crack growth rate of DHC is extensively high to reach a cladding failure in a year, and therefore, a suppression of DHC growth is inevitable to maintain the integrity of cladding during storage.
To determine the onset of DHC, the stress intensity must exceed the threshold stress intensity factor (KIH). Under normal storage conditions, the cladding hoop stress comes from the RIP. In the cladding geometry, i.e., long thin wall cylinder, the stress intensity factor for mode I can be expressed as
@where a is the crack depth and Q is the shape factor. In this equation, the threshold intensity factor is a function of crack depth, shape, and hoop stress. Fig. 6 shows the critical crack length and corresponding hoop stress for the onset of DHC when the cladding has a sharp crack. The required crack depth for the onset of DHC is predominantly dependent upon the KIH of the cladding material.
Fig. 6. Incipient crack depth for the onset of DHC.
On the other hand, the KIH is dependent upon various parameters such as temperature, hydrogen contents, neutron fluence, material properties, and the microstructure. Most of the experimentally measured KIH and theoretical estimations of KIH were limited to Zr-2.5Nb and Zircaloy-2, The reported KIH values are highly scattered in the range of 4–20 MPa m0.5, and 3–14 MPa m0.5 for Zr-2.5Nb and Zircaloy-2, respectively [30], [31], [32], [33]. Recently, Chan [33] thoroughly reviewed the data of DHC on Zircaloy-2 and Zr-2.5Nb and concluded that stress intensity of 5 MPa m0.5 is a conservative value for the onset of DHC within 95% confidence limit. In contrast, only little available data for Zircaloy-4 cladding have been reported. Huang et al. [34] reported that KIH has some high values of about 20 MPa m0.5 at around 250 °C. Other data on KIH showed that the value of KIH is around 5–6 MPa m0.5 at 227 °C and slightly increases with an increase in temperature up to 295 °C and then increases abruptly beyond 295 °C [35]. If the KIH of Zircaloy-4 is 5 MPa m0.5, and the maximum hoop stress is 110 MPa, the critical crack size for DHC initiation is greater than the cladding thickness. Given that the unrealistically large crack length does not exist in the cladding [32], [36], [37], DHC is unlikely to occur during dry storage.
However, there are significant uncertainties in the assessment of DHC in SNF: KIH of Zircaloy-4, crack size distribution in SNFs, and embrittlement of hydride. Recent experimental results by IAEA coordinated research program (CRP) at 250 °C showed some low KIH values [35], [38], [39]. The KIH of un-irradiated Zircaloy-4 at 250 °C is lower than 11 MPa m0.5 and is widely distributed from 2 up to 10 MPa m0.5 with a mean value of 5.4 MPa m0.5 and a standard deviation of 1.7 MPa m0.5 [37].
On the other hand, the theoretical estimations of KIH were proposed through following equation by Shi and Puls [40] who postulated that a fracture of hydride occurs only when the local stress in the hydride exceeds a critical value.
@where E is the elastic modulus, v is the Poisson ratio,σY  is the yield stress,σf  is the fracture strength of the hydrides,ε  is the stress free strain normal to the hydride plate direction, and t is the hydride thickness. The parameters in the equation are presented in Table 2. Fig. 7 shows the comparative results of theoretical and measured KIH of Zircaloy-4. Both the theoretical estimation and the measured KIH increase as the temperature increase. The theoretical value shows a good agreement with measured value when the postulated hydride thickness is between 0.5 and 2 μm, but the actual hydride thickness in an SEM image is within the range of 0.1–0.5 μm [41]. The value of KIH of Zircaloy-4 may be similar with that of Zircaloy-2, and Zr-2.5Nb and tend to decrease with a decrease in temperature and are not very sensitive at low temperatures below 250 °C [42]. However, the lower bound of KIH of Zircaloy-4 should be noticed because there is a large uncertainty in KIH especially at low temperature below 200 °C. If the KIH has the lower value of less than 2 MPa m0.5, the DHC initiation is possible in SNF.
Table 2. Parameters used in calculating KIH.
Fig. 7. Theoretical KIH by Shi & Puls model [40] and measured KIH [35], [37] of Zircaloy-4 cladding.
Another critical uncertainty is the crack size distribution in SNFs. It was proposed that the maximum crack size of high burn-up fuel will be on the order of 200 μm [33]. However, we do not have any information on cracks in SNFs. The only available data on cracks in SNF claddings are the crack size distributions proposed by Sanders et al. [44]; however, this crack distribution is limited to manufacturing defects, and does not reflect (1) corrosion-induced cracks, (2) cracks and flaws caused by PCMI or mishandling during shipping and transport, and (3) crack from the outer oxide layer. There are additional uncertainties on DHC in HBU owing to the detrimental effects of a hydride rim [45]. Similarly, a hydride blister and hydride lens are observed underneath the oxide spallation layer and near a missing pellet area [46]. These hydride rich regions, such as a hydride rim, blister or hydride lens, can be a starting point for DHC initiation. In addition, although there has been no direct evidence thus far, radial hydride formation due to hydride orientation can assist DHC and facilitate the crack initiation [22].
5. Conclusions
The RIP and corresponding hoop stress were calculated by using FRAPCON-4.0. RIP effects on degradation of Zircaloy-4 cladding under dry storage conditions were discussed and following conclusions were reached:
-RIP tends to increase with an increase in burn-up. The calculated maximum RIP of SNF at room temperature is 5.8 MPa inducing the hoop stress of 110 MPa at 400 °C.
-In the case of applying hoop stress limit of 90 MPa for LBU fuel, HR is hard to occur; however, HR can be an issue in the fuel between 40 and 50 GWd/tU, and therefore, another temperature limit is required to preclude cladding HR. If the cladding temperature can be maintained below 430 °C, then HR may not be a concern in LBU fuel.
-On the other hand, some HBU fuels can experience HR during storage; however, the effect of HR on the cladding ductility may not be significant when the cladding hoop stress is below 110 MPa.
-DHC of SNF seems not to be a concern during dry storage; however, more data on KIH of irradiated cladding are needed due to the uncertainty of the crack size in SNF.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Radioactive Waste Management Technology Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP), granted financial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea. (No. 2014171020166A)
