<title>Actinide mixed oxide conversion by advanced thermal denitration route</title>
<author>  Martin Leblanc; Gilles Leturcq; Eléonore Welcomme; Xavier Deschanels; Thibaud Delahaye</author>
<Affiliation>Laboratoire d’études des Procédés de Conversion des Actinides – LPCA – CEA Marcoule, CEA, Nuclear Energy Division, Research Department on Mining and Fuel Recycling Processes Service – DEN∖MAR∖DMRC∖SMFA∖LPCA, F30207, Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France；Institut de Chimie Séparative de Marcoule, ICSM UMR5257, Centre de Marcoule, F-30207, Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France；Direction – DIR – CEA Marcoule, CEA, Nuclear Energy Division, – DEN∖MAR∖DIR, F30207, Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1016/j.jnucmat.2019.03.049</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311519302016</URL>
Abstract
In the framework of generation IV development for nuclear reactors, actinide mixed oxides are considered for multirecycling plutonium fuels and for transmutation targets of minor actinides. In this context, new processes are being developed for either the synthesis of mixed uranium-plutonium oxide compounds for MOx fuel or uranium-americium target fabrications. The main purposes are to simplify and step up industrial processes as well as to decrease actinide dust dispersion, and liquid effluent and gaseous releases. Among options for conversion route, a novel and patented advanced thermal denitration in presence of organic additives was established successfully to synthesize UO2+δ, U0.55Pu0.45O2±δ, and U0.9Am0.1O2-δ oxides. Here, we describe the different intermediate steps of this process together with the characterization of the oxides obtained. The data highlight several advantages of this new route for actinide conversion.
Keywords:Denitration；Conversion；Organic additives；Actinide；Uranium；Plutonium
1. Introduction
This study is part of the recycling of recoverable materials (U, Pu actinides) from spent nuclear fuels. Conversion is a key step at the interface between the separation and purification processes and fabrication steps of uranium-plutonium oxide fuels called MOx (Mixed Oxides). Briefly, it consists in converting quantitatively a solution containing the products obtained from purification processes. Generation IV (GEN IV) reactors should allow a multi-recycling of Pu as well as the transmutation of minor actinides, but conversion routes must suit additional needs compared to the current process:
-Continuous process with higher throughput will be necessary to increase conversion rates as the amount of matter to convert;
-Conversion must integrate fluxes with the minimum of possible additional operations, avoiding redox adjustments or concentration steps of feeding actinide solutions still for a better efficiency;
-Conversion process must be able to synthesize oxide powders with different Pu contents for both LWR and SFR MOx fuel fabrication;
-MOx synthesis has to be favored to prevent the proliferation risk associated to Pu multi-recycling;
-MOx or mixture of oxides synthesized must be adapted for fuel pellet shaping directly, without any grinding and sieving steps to reduce dust generation;
-Management of effluents and gas release should be simple and efficient processes.
Meeting these requirements explains the large number of studies conducted so far to synthesize mixed oxides containing both uranium and plutonium.
In the literature, actinide co-conversion routes can be categorized into three major families: precipitation routes, sol-gel routes and denitration routes. Although precipitation processes offer a complementary partitioning factor and allow the synthesis of a single phase U1-xPuxO2±δ powder after a single calcination, these processes require a redox adjustment (U(IV)/Pu(III) oxalic co-conversion), bring filterability difficulties and produce effluents hardly manageable (carbonate conversion route) [[1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]]. Sol-gel routes come in two forms: internal or external gelations [[8], [9], [10]]. They have the advantage of not forming dust with the synthesis of oxide microspheres, but whatever internal or external gelation routes, they involve the managing of a large amount of hazardous effluents, including ammonium nitrate solutions, and they cannot achieve the targeted cadences [7,10]. Denitration routes are more direct conversion pathways. Among them, microwave-assisted denitration of actinide salts was developed and industrialized by Japan Nuclear Fuel Industry Limited [11,12]. The dielectric properties of uranyl nitrates and plutonium nitrates, initially hydrated, make it possible to carry out microwave thermal co-denitration in four steps: heating, concentration, denitration, followed by a last complementary step for maintaining the denitrated product heating. The recovered product is a U3O8/PuO2 mixture followed by calcination under a reducing atmosphere to form UO2/PuO2 mixture [13,14]. In Nitrox process [15], a concentrated solution has to be prepared first and cold crystallization follows. The powder obtained is then dehydrated and denitrated, with the objective of staying at a temperature below the melting temperature corresponding to the instantaneous decomposition of the salt [16]. MDD (modified direct denitration) process was developed at Oak Ridge National Laboratory [17,18]. This process involves the addition of ammonium nitrate to the initial solution of uranyl nitrate. This leads to the formation of double nitrate salts of uranyl and ammonium, which decompose without going through a melting state. A last step of calcination under reducing atmosphere is required to form a UO2/PuO2 mixture [7,19,20]. Advantages of all these thermal denitration processes are the rapidity of the reaction and the absence of filtration step. However, two major drawbacks can be noticed on these routes: a NOx treatment has to be added to avoid release and/or corrosion problems, and the production of actinide oxide dusts either directly or due to the requirement of a milling step prior to fuel pelletization [7].
As a result, none of the conversion routes studied so far suits all the additional specifications exposed below and associated to GEN IV fuel cycle. For these reasons, it was necessary to develop a new way of conversion with simultaneous management of uranium and plutonium. A present proposed chemical route is inspired by NPG (nitrate polyacrylamide gel) synthesis method [[21], [22], [23], [24]]. It permits a mono [25] or poly cationic [21] oxide synthesis and comprises four distinct steps. An aqueous solution containing cations and additives is prepared and then gelified in a crosslinked polymer by adding an initiator. The gelation makes it possible to trap all the cations present in solution in a homogeneous manner. This gel is then dehydrated to synthetize a xerogel which is then calcined to form the final oxide [21,25]. So far, this chemical route had never been applied to actinide oxides. Such a synthesis method is flexible, coping with high versatility in terms of acidity, cation concentration, use of chelating agents and choice in starting monomer [[26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31]]. Based on these results, this work explores the so called “Advanced thermal Denitration in presence of Organic Additives (ADOA) process” conversion route, to synthetize mixed actinide oxides. It will also describe all the developments and adjustments performed to suit the requirements linked to the synthesis of nuclear fuel precursors (e.g. sulphur and chloride free using safe reagents).
This paper presents the synthesis by advanced thermal denitration in presence of organic additives of UO2+δ, U0.55Pu0.45O2±δ and U0.9Am0.1O2-δ enabling to demonstrate the feasibility of such conversion route applied to single or mixed actinide solutions.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Sample preparation
The characteristics of the reagents used are given in Table 1.
Table 1. Characteristics of reagents.
The various steps that take place during gel formation are shown Fig. 1: the actinides (uranium or uranium associate with plutonium or americium) are mixed into a nitric solution in proportions matching the targeted stoichiometry expected in the final oxide. For UO2+δ and U0.55Pu0.45O2±δ syntheses, uranium nitrate (UO2(NO3)2) is dissolved in nitric acid and then, Pu as nitric solution is added to the uranium solution if required. Total metal concentration and total nitrate concentration were equal to 0.105 mol L−1 and 0.5 mol L−1 respectively. In the case of U0.9Am0.1O2-δ synthesis, uranyl nitrate is dissolved in an americium nitric solution with a total metal concentration of 0.28 mol L−1 and a total nitrate concentration of 3.56 mol L−1. In all cases, to avoid precipitation during synthesis, actinide complexation was obtained by adding urea to the solution, the concentration of urea was 0.28 mol L−1 [32,33]. Oxide synthesis was then carried out by adding acrylic acid (AA) and N, N′-methylene bis (acrylamide) (MBAM) in a molar ratio of 20: 1 (AA: MBAM). The resulting fully homogeneous solution was heated up to 100 °C and supplemented with 25 μL of hydrogen peroxide (30 wt%) to quickly allow its complete polymerization into a gel. Hydrogen peroxide is here used in substitution of the common polymerization initiators (ammonium persulphate or azobisisobutyronitrile AIBN) to suit the specifications for further nuclear fuel fabrication (no sulphur in the final nuclear fuel and safe reagents). The gel, introduced in a glass reactor, was then dried into xerogel using a hot plate heated up at 150 °C. Oxidative calcination of xerogel was then performed at 800 °C in reconstituted air (N2-80%/O2-20%) for 2 h and led to the total oxidation of all residual carbon compounds. A second calcination, performed under Ar-95%/H2-5% up to 800 °C for 2 h, was necessary to obtain the targeted phase formation.
Fig. 1. Flowchart of ADOA synthesis route (photos illustrate the case of the U/Pu synthesis).
2.2. X-ray diffraction
The XRD diffraction patterns were recorded using two different Bruker D8 Advance devices equipped with Cu radiations (Kα1 = 1.5406 Å, Kα2 = 1.5444 Å) and a Lynx-Eye linear detector, in a θ-θ Bragg-Brentano configuration. The step was set at ∼0.02°, with a time per step of 0.5 s, for an angular range ranging from 25 to 80° 2θ. For UO2+δ and U1-xPuxO2±δ, a mixture of oxide with gold powder, glue and acetone was deposed on a steal holder. The use of glue and of a protective dome allowed actinide confinement during XRD analysis. For U1-xAmxO2-δ samples, due to their higher alpha activity, a mixture of oxide powder and grease was prepared before deposition on a holder and XRD measurements were performed using a diffractometer set up in a glove box [34]. In both configurations, gold (JCPDS # 00-004-0784) was added to the powder sample as a reference for position calibrations. Bruker EVA software DIFFRACplus was used for phase identification. The lattice parameters of the synthesized compounds were determined using the Fullproof software [35], with a method of The Lease for improvements. Thompson Cox Hastings Pseudo Voigt profile function was used for the refinement of the mean crystallite size and Le Bail method for refinements [36]. The Au phase profile was also adjusted, but the lattice parameters were kept fixed as a reference.
2.3. Spectrometry UV-Vis
The concentration and the ratio of the actinides within the solution were measured using a spectrometer (Shimadzu 1800) from 350 to 850 nm with a change of optics to 800 nm. In order to allow spectra decomposition [37], the solutions were passed in 1 M nitric acid. The decomposition was then performed using the standard spectra of U (VI), Pu (IV), Pu (VI) and Am (III) also recorded in 1 M nitric acid.
2.4. SEM
The powders were observed using a Zeiss SUPRA 55/55VP FEG-SEM (Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope) set up in a glove box. The SEM micrographs were obtained using the In Leens mode.
2.5. Specific surface area measurements
N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm was used for the determination of specific surface area. The specific surface area was calculated by the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) 5 point method [38] from around 1 g of each powder. Adsorption – desorption isotherms were measured at the boiling point of nitrogen (−196 °C) using a Micromeritics Gemini 2375 nuclearized. Control of the calibration was done using carbon standard samples.
2.6. Stoichiometry analyses
Once the powder obtained, the final ratio Am/(Am + U) and Pu/(Pu + U) for the mixed oxides was validated by a total dissolution in 10 mL of HNO3/HF (10 M/0.05 M) at boiling temperature for 2 h followed by chemical analyses by l-line X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and TIMS. For XRF, the actinide contents U, Pu and Am were determined by measuring the X-ray fluorescence on the line L in a hot cell [39]. A specific device for focusing on the energy range from 13 to 15 keV using a graphite monochromator was developed specifically for actinide determinations [38]: The X-ray generator and X-ray tube (Rh anode, 3 kW, 75 μm) are marketed by PANalytical; two X-ray tube configurations were used, 50 kV/30 mA and 30 kV/10 mA; the primary X-ray photon beam is filtered by a Rh target (200 μm) producing an almost monochromatic beam; the detector is a hyper-pure Ge crystal (Eurisys EGX 30–05, active area 30 mm2) cooled with liquid nitrogen; the acquisition electronics were replaced by a Canberra DSA-1000 coupled with Genie 2000 software. TIMS (Thermal Ionization Mass Spectroscopy) analyses consist in evaporating and ionizing by heating a diluted solution to be analysed deposited on a metal ribbon using a micro syringe. The solution is then dried and installed in the source of the instrument. The ribbon is heated by vacuum Joule effect, allowing the evaporation and ionization of the sample, to form an ion beam which is then analysed in the mass spectrometer. Ion collectors detect the different beams produced by mass separation. Results are given as isotopic ratio. The spectrometer used is a Thermo Fisher Scientific Triton.
3. Results and discussion
As the whole actinide solution is embedded inside the gel, this synthesis route avoids any actinide leak in residual waters and withdraws any filtration issues during the process. Moreover, the actinide ratio of the solution is maintained inside the final oxide. To ensure having the targeted actinide ratio, UV-vis spectrometry was carried out on actinide solutions. First, the former Pu and Am solutions were analysed to confirm their concentrations. It was found for the Pu solution that 97% of Pu was Pu(IV) and 3% was Pu(VI) with no influence expected on the synthesis process. Once, uranium nitrate dissolved to form the feed actinide solution, it was analysed to confirm its actinide ratios by uv-vis spectra decomposition using reference spectra (Fig. 2). As expected, ratios of 45 ± 4.5% and 10 ± 1.0% were found for U/Pu (Fig. 2a.) and U/Am solutions (Fig. 2b.), respectively. UV-vis spectrum of the U/Pu solution after urea, AA and MBAM additions was also recorded, showing no more Pu(VI) presence and a complexation of the Pu with a redshift of the Pu (IV) bands (Fig. 3).
Fig. 2. UV-Vis spectrum of actinide solutions before addition of organic matter. (a) Uranium and plutonium solution spectrum, (b) uranium and americium solution spectrum.
Fig. 3. UV-Vis spectrum of actinide solutions before (black) and after (red) organic addition. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
The solutions were stable over the synthesis time. It has to be noticed that no adjustment of actinide redox had to be carried out for these syntheses.
The method consists then in a polymerization reaction taking place within the solution using the polyacrylate derived from the AA and MBAM monomers, a process initiated by the free radicals generated by hydrogen peroxide. The obtained gel is a diphasic medium, composed of a network of polyacrylic polymers crosslinked by MBAM immobilizing the actinide solution [26,28]. This allows the polymer to incorporate the entire solution and form a homogeneous gel. The fact that the entire solution is incorporated into the polymer network overcomes any effluent management issues, and ensures that all the cations of the system are stripped into the final gel. Gel dehydration into xerogel, using a hot plate at 150 °C, occurs quickly in 1 h compared to 12 h at 120 °C [31], or 24 h at 100 °C [27]. Thermal decomposition of xerogels was studied under reconstituted air (N2-80%/O2-20%) (Fig. 4/TG-DSC curves) for three different systems: xerogels without cations, xerogels with uranium only, and xerogels with both uranium and plutonium.
Fig. 4. ATG-signals for xerogel decomposition for three different systems: xerogel without cations, xerogel with uranium only and xerogel with both uranium and plutonium, with a ramp of 1 °C/min and under (N2-80%/O2-20%) flux.
The total (100%) degradation of the polymeric network without cation but with compensation of nitrate by nitric acid addition, was observed at a temperature of 600 °C. The decomposition of DSC curve has highlighted four exothermic peaks located at 325 °C, 400 °C, 480 °C and 500 °C. The completed degradation of xerogel containing uranium led to a mass loss of 91% of initial mass. This mass loss takes place mainly from 200 °C to 500 °C. The decomposition of DSC signal exhibits five exothermic peaks, observed at 270 °C, 320 °C, 360 °C, 400 °C and 460 °C, plus an exothermic peak at 150 °C unexplained. As for the xerogel containing only uranium, the degradation of the xerogel containing both uranium and plutonium was characterized by a mass loss of 91% of initial mass. The decomposition of the DSC signal exhibits also five exothermic peaks at 268 °C, 290 °C, 325 °C, 355 °C and 370 °C, plus the same unexplained exothermic peak at 150 °C.
The 91% mass loss observed for U and U/Pu xerogels conforms to the expected theoretical mass loss of 90% in these two cases. The determination of exothermic peaks for cation-free system, and for U and U/Pu – doped xerogels, made possible peak assignment to the contributions of carbon skeleton degradation, and uranium and plutonium presence, although some reactions remained unelucidated. DSC on xerogel without cation allowed assigning peaks at 320, 400, 480 and 500 °C for carbon skeleton degradation despite no specific chemical reaction could them be defined. The DSC curves of U and U/Pu xerogel degradations were exploited on the basis of the non-cationic xerogel decomposition (four peaks observed) to determine first the contributions of U and, then, of Pu. The peak at 320 °C is also observed for the two other systems (U and U/Pu) while the peak at 400 °C was only observed for U and seems to be absent in the DSC signal of the U/Pu system, as well as for the peaks at 480 and 500 °C. These two last peaks appeared at lower temperatures in the case of U-doped xerogel by 30–40 °C. The absence of the 3 latest exothermic peaks for the degradation of the polymer network may be explained by the presence of a very high exothermic peak observed at 370 °C while Pu is present. This peak is only present if the xerogel contains Pu and, therefore, could mask the three missing peaks. Such exothermic peak has been observed previously for conversion of Pu oxalate into oxide and corresponds to the reaction of conversion of Pu oxo-carbonate (PuOCO3) into Pu oxide (PuO2) [40]. Two more peaks were observed for the uranium-containing xerogel, at 270 °C and 360 °C, and they likely correspond to reactions involving this element. Finally, and by deduction, the 290 °C peak observed for the U/Pu-doped xerogel can be attributed to the conversion of Pu-carboxylate complex onto Pu oxo-carbonate [40].
Once xerogel conversion is completed, after calcination at 800 °C in reconstituted air, an intimate mixture of PuO2 (space group Fm-3m) [41] and U3O8 (space group P6̅2 m) [42] oxides was recovered as reveled by XRD powder analysis. Similarly, after calcination in reconstituted air (N2-80%/O2-20%) at 800 °C during 2 h, U3O8 oxide was formed for the uranium compound (Fig. 5), uranium crystallized in hexagonal form (P6̅2 m) [42].
Fig. 5. XRD diffraction pattern for U3O8/PuO2 and U3O8 converted for 2 h at 800 °C in reconstituted air. Peaks labelled with square match the plutonium oxide phase, stars match the uranium phase, circles match the golden phase and triangles match the sample holder. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
The X-ray diagram collected after thermal conversion under reconstituted air of the xerogel loaded with uranium and americium shows that a monophasic compound is obtained (Fig. 6). Phase identification indicated that the crystalline structure was of the hexagonal type P6̅2 m [42,43]. Lattice parameters, as determined from refinement shown Fig. 6, are a = 6.836 (2) Å and c = 4.166 (2) Å. Table 2 summarizes adjustment parameters obtained for this refinement. These lattice parameter values correspond to a U3O8 compound partially substituted with americium [43].
Fig. 6. XRD diffraction pattern and refinement results for U/Am converted for 2 h at 800 °C in reconstituted air. The diagram calculated by Le Bail is in red for the reference space group P6̅2 m, the difference between them is in blue. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Table 2. Fit parameters obtained after Le Bail refinement of samples studied.
After this first calcination under reconstituted air required to oxidize the organic network of the xerogel, a second thermal treatment in Ar/H2 (95%/5%) at 800 °C for 2 h was performed to synthetize the targeted oxides: UO2+δ, U1-xPuxO2±δ or U1-xAmxO2-δ.
Following the ultimate calcination in reductive atmosphere, single-phase oxides were obtained as observed by XRD analyses showing the presence of only a single fluorite-like structure (Fm-3m) for the three samples (Table 3 and Figs. 7 and 8).
Table 3. Determination of the Pu and Am contents in the samples. Determination of the ratio O/M.
Fig. 7. XRD diffraction pattern and refinement results for UO2+δ converted for 2 h at 800 °C under reconstituted air, then under hydrogenated argon (Ar-95/H2-5%) for 2 h at 800 °C. The experimental diffractogram is in black. The diffractogram calculated by Le Bail is in red for the reference space group Fm-3m, the difference between them is in blue. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Fig. 8. XRD diffraction pattern and refinement results for U0.55Pu0.45O2±δ (A) and U0.9Am0.1O2-δ (B) converted for 2 h at 800 °C in reconstituted air and then under hydrogenated argon (Ar-95/H2-5%) for 2 h at 800 °C.
Lattice parameters of UO2+δ (5.465 (2) Å), U0.55Pu0.45O2±δ (5.425 (2) Å) and U0.9Am0.1O2-δ (5.456 (2) Å) were determined from the Le Bail refinement using the Fullprof suite. Table 2 summarizes the adjustment parameters obtained for these refinements. These lattice parameters are lower than those usually reported in the literature. For uranium oxide, the expected lattice parameter of UO2.00 is 5.470 Å [44,45], a difference of 0.005 Å is observed resulting from an O/M ratio greater than 2.00.
For uranium oxide, O/M ratio can be determined as a function of the lattice parameter using equation (1) [48]. When calculated using equation (1), a O/M ratio of 2.04 was obtained, in agreement with the previous formation of U3O8 during the first calcination under air (O/M = 2.67). The calcination step could be optimized to obtain an O/M ratio of 2.00, e.g. by increasing the residence time in the oven under Ar-95%/H2-5% atmosphere.
To determine the oxygen stoichiometry for uranium-based oxides substituted with plutonium or americium, the Pu or Am content of the mixed oxides have to be evaluated first. XRF and TIMS analyses were carried out to determine these ratios in both cases. The correspondence between the values obtained by UV-Vis spectrometry on feed actinide solutions and XRF or TIMS results on dissolution liquors or the two oxides shows that the ratio between the actinides introduced into the initial solution and the ratio obtained in the final oxide are identical. As shown in Table 3, oxides compositions determined by XRF and TIMS were: U0.55Pu0.45O2±δ and U0.9Am0.1O2-δ. Equation (2), also known as Vegard's law [49,50], allows to calculate the theoretical lattice parameter of a U1-xPuxO2.00 knowing x. For x = 0.45, the theoretical lattice parameter of this mixed oxide should be 5.435 Å. A difference of 0.010 Å is therefore observed suggesting an over-stoichiometry in oxygen. If equation (3) permits to determine the O/M ratio of a uranium plutonium mixed oxide with a plutonium content less than 25% [50,51], this law cannot be used for greater plutonium contents as specified by the authors and, therefore, it cannot be applied to the samples of this study. However, similarly to the uranium sample, the U3O8 formation during the first calcination under air may explain such oxygen over stoichiometry.
Since no law for the calculation of the O/M ratio is available for U/Am oxides, no conclusion can be drawn today for this ratio. However, the literature indicates a large number of lattice parameters associated with U0.9Am0.1O2-δ (presence of U(V)/U(IV) in the oxide) due to the alpha irradiation of americium. The lattice parameter of the U0.9Am0.1O2-δ sample of this study is on the low range of these values (Table 3) [49,49,50,50,51].
(1)Law of variation of a(Å) for UO2+x: a = 5.470–0.112x
(2)Law of variation of a(Å) for U1-xPuxO2.00: a = 5.470–0.074x
(3)Law of variation of a(Å) for U1-xPuxO2-y: a = 5,470–0,074x + 0,32y
The average crystallite size estimated from XRD patterns treatment using modified Thompson-Cox-Hastings refinement for the three oxides showed that uranium substitution by plutonium or americium seems to have no impact on crystallite size of the samples (Figs. 5 and 6): The size of the crystallite of about 90 nm did not depend on the cations in solution, but probably resulted mainly from the synthesis method. It has to be noticed that for the U/Am sample a greater acidity of the actinide solution was used with no impact on the final crystallize size of the obtained oxide. This parameter does not seem to play a major role in this synthesis route on the contrary of some other synthesis methods such as internal gelation and oxalate precipitation (change in solubility limit). For this synthesis route, the crystallite size may result from the level of reticulation of the polymeric gel (i.e. the MBAM over acrylic acid ratio used for the gelation). This last assumption was not demonstrated in this present work.
The specific surface area of the oxide powders obtained after the second calcination, determined using BET method is around 5 m2 g−1, whatever the composition. The obtained oxide powders were also characterized using a nuclearized Zeiss SUPRA 55/55VP FEG-SEM (field emission scanning electron microscope). SEM micrographs (Fig. 9) show a typical morphology of samples obtained using a thermal denitration synthesis route in presence of organic additives [[21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31]]. The powders are composed of large agglomerates of several tens of micrometers length and a hundred nanometers thick constituted of nanoparticles. Crystallite size determined from XRD patterns is around one hundred nanometers, hence the thickness corresponds to the size of the crystallites. The characteristic morphology of the three powders is therefore a set of fine sheets composed of crystallites of about a hundred nanometers. Due to particle size, appropriate laser measurements could not be performed. Once again, the morphology of the powders does not seem to depend on the cationic elements introduced, but it probably results mainly from the synthesis method and the use of polymers. The sheets observed in the context of the substitution of uranium by americium exhibited lace effects. These effects probably resulted from a slight amorphisation were not observed in the other substitutions and can be explained by the high alpha activity of americium (241Am).
Fig. 9. Scanning electron micrographs for the actinide oxide powders converted under reconstituted air and then under hydrogenated argon. In green the micrographs of UO2+δ (left), in blue that of U0.55Pu0.45O2±δ (in the middle) and in red that of U0.9Am0.1O2-δ (right) converted for 2 h at 800 °C in reconstituted air and then under hydrogenated argon (Ar-95%/H2-5%) for 2 h at 800 °C. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Such a sheet morphology is not favorable for a common nuclear fuel or transmutation target shaping by pelletization and therefore new fabrication methods would have to be implemented to use such precursors without any additional treatment.
Based on these results, it is possible to conclude that the synthesis of actinide oxides using a NPG derivate method herein called “advanced thermal denitration in presence of organic additives” route as UO2+δ, U0.55Pu0.45O2±δ and U0.9Am0.1O2-δ were synthetized with success up to a scale of 5 g batch.
4. Conclusion
The main objective of this study was to explore the possibility to synthetize mono and mixed actinide oxides using the so-called “advanced thermal denitration in presence of organic additives” synthesis route, a derivate synthesis route from one commonly used in other fields to obtain poly-cationic oxides. Feasibility is demonstrated here by successful synthesis of three oxides: UO2.04, U0.55Pu0.45O2±δ and U0.9Am0.1O2-δ. The proposed synthesis route is robust and concerns the synthesis of both MOx fuel precursors and oxides for transmutation targets for the future GEN IV reactors. This chemical process represents a significant breakthrough in the methods currently used for MOx synthesis. Indeed, it allows the synthesis of mixed oxides from solutions resulting from reprocessing without redox adjustment using U(VI)/Pu(IV) (the presence of Pu (VI) was even not detrimental) and over a wide range (0 M − 3 M) of nitric acid concentrations. This new route requires neither a specific concentration of actinides in solution or precipitation of cations. Therefore, it does not produce liquid effluents, avoids actinide leaks in residual waters, and withdraws any filtration issues. However, the morphology of the obtained powders is hardly compatible with the current methods for shaping MOx fuels (pelletizing) and would require new ways of MOx fuel fabrication from such precursors.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank: Romain Vauchy and Alexis Jolie for U/Am XRD, Gauthier Jouan and Jean-Robert Sevilla for SEM images and Alexandre Quemet and Eric Esbelin for XRF and TIMS analysis. This work was part of the French National Research Agency (ANR) through the project ‘‘ASTUTE” (contract ANR-15-CE08-0011-01).
