<title>A study of separation and solidification of group II nuclides in waste salt delivered from the pyrochemical process of used nuclear fuel</title>
<author> H.C. Eun; J.H. Choi; N.Y. Kim; T.K. Lee; S.Y. Han; S.A. Jang; T.J. Kim; H.S. Park; D.H. Ahn</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Fuel Cycle Process Development Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Daedeok-daero 989-111, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34057, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.jnucmat.2017.04.060</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311517302970</URL>
Abstract
If group II nuclides, which contain high heat-generative elements, in waste salt are fabricated into a waste form rich in group II nuclides, the waste form can be used in radionuclide thermoelectric generator applications. For this reason, the separation of group II nuclides in salt (LiCl, LiCl-KCl) was conducted, after which a waste form rich in them was fabricated. In this study, group II nuclide chlorides in salt were effectively separated into a carbonate or oxychloride form, and the separated nuclides were successfully fabricated into a homogenous and stable glass waste form with high contents (45–50 wt%) of these nuclides.
Keywords：Group II nuclide;Pyrochemical process;Used nuclear fuel;Radionuclide thermoelectric generator;Separation;Fabrication
1. Introduction
A nuclear energy cycle regarded as a prospective energy source for the future generation is to pursue further safer operations, high proliferation resistance and a reduced environmental impact of long lived radioactive waste [1]. The pyrochemical process of used nuclear fuel with molten salt as a reaction medium is one of the key processes to realize the nuclear energy cycle [2], [3]. This process is used electrochemically to partition fission products and recover U and TRU metals as valuable resources from used nuclear fuels in a molten salt bath [3], [4]. In the pyrochemical process, LiCl or LiCl-KCl eutectic waste salts containing small amounts of group II nuclide chlorides (BaCl2, SrCl2) are generated as radioactive waste. These waste salts are heat-generating and water-soluble substance and therefore, must be fabricated into a stable waste form for permanent disposal [4], [5]. However, they are also not compatible with conventional solidification processes given that waste salts can easily become vaporized during the solidification process [6], [7], [8]. For this reason, it can be effective to convert group II nuclide chlorides into a thermally stable form and separate them from the waste salt before solidification. This method can facilitate a reduction of radioactive waste generation and simplify the fabrication of a stable waste form. The reactive distillation process is very effective when used to convert rare earth chlorides into an oxychloride or an oxide form and then easily separate them from LiCl-KCl eutectic salt [4]. This is one of key processes to realize the method.
This paper presents results pertaining to the separation of group II nuclides in salt (LiCl, LiCl-KCl) using a reactive distillation process and describes the fabrication of the separated group II nuclides into a glass waste form. Based on the results, a method capable of the separation and solidification of group II nuclides in waste salt delivered from the pyrochemical process of used nuclear fuel is evaluated.
2. Experimental and methods
The equipment for the reactive distillation test of LiCl-KCl eutectic salt containing rare earth chlorides was also used in this study [4]. This equipment is composed of a chamber for reaction and distillation, electric heaters, a cooling water circulator, and a vacuum pump. To recover almost all of the vaporized electrolytes only in the receiver, the equipment was designed as a body with a vaporization chamber and condensation chamber, three heaters installed to generate temperature gradients in the chamber, and a cooled wall positioned only under the bottom of the receiver. The chamber, sample boat, and receiver were made using Inconel 625 because the salt is highly corrosive under the distillation conditions. The salt distillation in the equipment is subjected to the forces of temperature gradients at a reduced pressure. As the waste salt surrogate, LiCl and LiCl-KCl mixture (molar ratio of LiCl: 0.58) containing BaCl2 (Alfa Aesar, 99%) and SrCl2 (Alfa Aesar, 99%) were prepared. The group II nuclide chlorides were included at a level of 5.0 wt% in LiCl and LiCl-KCl mixture. As the chemical agent for reactive distillation, Li2CO3 (Aldrich, 99%) and K2CO3 (Aldrich, 99%) were used.
Reactive distillation tests of the LiCl and LiCl-KCl mixture containing the group II nuclide chlorides were conducted in a glove box charged with argon gas (>99.999%). The concentrations of O2 and H2O in the glove box were maintained below 10 ppm. The LiCl and LiCl-KCl mixture containing group II nuclides chlorides and Li2CO3 (for the LiCl) and K2CO3 (for the LiCl-KCl mixture) were mixed in a polypropylene bottle before being added to the sample boat. At this time, the mass of salt (LiCl, LiCl-KCl mixture) was 45.0 g, and the masses of SrCl2 and BaCl2 were 2.5 g, respectively. The reactions between Li2CO3 (K2CO3) and the group II nuclide chlorides were predicted as following equations. The chemical agent was injected at 1.0 molar ratio of the group II nuclide chlorides.
(1)BaCl2 + Li2CO3 (K2CO3) = BaCO3 + 2LiCl (KCl)
(2)SrCl2 + Li2CO3 (K2CO3) = SrCO3 + 2LiCl (KCl)
The sample boat was charged into the reaction chamber, and the chamber was then heated to the proper temperatures for the reactions between the rare earth chloride and the alkali carbonate mixture. The temperatures for the reactions were determined to be 450 °C (for the LiCl-KCl mixture) and 650 °C (for the LiCl). These reactions were conducted for 1.0 h. In the reactions between Li2CO3 (K2CO3) and the group II nuclide chlorides, CO2 gas can be generated if the group II nuclide chlorides are converted into an oxide form. Therefore, the pressure in the chamber was reduced by 100 Torr from ambient pressure to vent the gaseous material generated during the reactions. After the reaction process, the pressure in the chamber was reduced for the salt distillation process by 1.0 Torr from 100 Torr, and the vaporization chamber and condensation chamber were heated to the given temperatures (Heater-1, 2: 920 °C, Heater-3: 700 °C). These conditions were maintained to distill the salt for 2.0 h.
After the reactive distillation step, the fabrication of the separated group II nuclides into a glass waste form was conducted in an electric furnace. The electric furnace can be heated to 1500 °C under an air condition. The fabrication of the separated group II nuclides was performed using the CaO-SrO-BaO-SiO2 system [9]. The compositions for the fabrication of the separated group II nuclides were determined to produce group II nuclide-rich waste form, as detailed in Table 1. The melting temperature for the compositions was 1350 °C in all cases, and this temperature was fixed through the melting tests of the compositions, ash shown in Table 1. After melting for 1 h, a waste form of the separated group II was obtained by quenching the melts in a graphite crucible.
Table 1. Compositions for the fabrication of the separated group II nuclides after the reactive distillation test of salt containing group II nuclides [wt%].
The amount of group II nuclides in the salt recovered from the reactive distillation tests was measured to calculate their separation ratios by dissolving the salt in 0.1 M HNO3 and analyzing them through ICP-OES (Optima 8300, PerkinElmer). The salt recovery efficiency was determined using the ratio of the mass fraction of the recovered salt from the reactive distillation test over the initial mass of salt. The residual compounds in the sample boat and the waste forms were identified by an XRD (D8 Advance A25, Bruker, Conditions: Cu target, 40 kV, 40 mA, 0.2°/sec) analysis. High resolution images of the waste forms were obtained by means of FE-SEM (Magellan 400, FEI Company). The glass-transition temperature (Tg) was measured under the N2 condition at a heating rate of 10 °C/min using TGA-DTA (TG/DTA 6300, Seiko Instrument) and TMA (TMA/SS 6000, Seiko Instrument) instruments. Density levels were determined using the Archimedes method. A chemical durability test for the waste forms was conducted using PCT (Product Consistency Test) as a static leaching test (ASTM Standard C 1285-02) [10]. In the PCT, the waste forms were crushed to a 100–200 mesh size, and then immersed in purified water (sample mass 1 g vs water volume 10 ml) for 7 days at 90 °C. After completing the PCT, the samples were filtered, and then analyzed by means of ICP-OES (Optima 8300, PerkinElmer).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Thermodynamic equilibrium calculations of reactions between group II nuclides and chemical agents
Before conducting the separation of group II nuclides in salt, the Gibbs free energies of the reactions between the group II nuclide chlorides and the chemical agents (Li2CO3, K2CO3) were calculated by means of software (HSC-Chemistry 5.1) [11], and the results are shown in Table 2. In this calculation, the initial amounts were determined using the reactive distillation test conditions. According to Table 2, the reactions using Li2CO3 are not effective when compared with the reactions using K2CO3, and the reactions between SrCl2 and the chemical agents are superior to the reactions between BaCl2 and these agents. The activities of the reactions increase with an increase in the temperature. Table 2 also shows that the conversions of group II nuclide chlorides into a carbonate form are more active than their conversions into an oxide form.
Table 2. Gibbs free energies of reactions between group II nuclide chlorides and Li2CO3 or K2CO3 [kcal].
Considering the Gibbs free energies of the reactions between the group II nuclide chlorides and the chemical agents, thermodynamic equilibrium calculations of the conversions of group II nuclide chlorides into a carbonate form were carried out at 450–900 °C to predict the results of the reactions under the reactive distillation conditions using software (HSC-Chemistry 5.1) [11], and the results are presented in Fig. 1. Fig. 1(a) shows the thermodynamic equilibrium results of the reactions between the group II nuclide chlorides and Li2CO3. According to Fig. 1(a), SrCl2 can be effectively converted into SrCO3, independent of the temperature. On the other hand, it is not effective to convert BaCl2 into BaCO3. This conversion increases with an increase in the temperature; however, the conversion ratio reaches approximately 0.1. Hence, Li2CO3 can remain as an unreacted agent, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Fig. 1(b) shows the thermodynamic equilibrium results of the reactions between the group II nuclide chlorides and K2CO3. Fig. 1 (b) indicates that the conversions of the group II nuclide chlorides into a carbonate form can be effective, and the effects of the temperature on these conversions are very minor. Accordingly, very little residual K2CO3 remains as an unreacted agent, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Based on these thermodynamic equilibrium results, the injections of the chemical agents were determined to be 1.0 for the separation of the group II nuclides in salt.
Fig. 1. Thermodynamic equilibrium calculation results.
3.2. Separation of group II nuclide chlorides in salt using a reactive distillation process
Before conducting the separation of the group II nuclides in the salt using the reactive distillation process, a reactive distillation test of LiCl containing SrCl2 or BaCl2 was conducted to observe the corresponding conversion forms during reactive distillation. In this case, Li2CO3 was used as a chemical agent. Fig. 2 shows the XRD-patterns of the products separated from LiCl after the reactive distillation test. According to Fig. 2(a), SrCl2 in LiCl was mainly converted into a carbonate form (SrCO3) after the reactive distillation test, while some of the SrCl2 was converted into an oxide form (SrO). The thermal mass reduction of SrCO3 under a nitrogen gas condition was also investigated at a heating rate of 5.0 °C/min, as described in Fig. 3. As shown in this figure, the mass reduction of SrCO3 was sharp at temperatures exceeding 800 °C, and the final mass reduction approached 30%. This mass reduction indicates that the SrCO3 decomposed into SrO and CO2. Specially, it was found that SrCO3 can be converted into SrO during the reactive distillation test. Therefore, it is considered that some of the SrCO3 was converted into SrO during the reactive distillation test, and SrO was identified in the separated products. This separation result of SrCl2 in the LiCl is in very good agreement with the thermodynamic equilibrium calculation results. Fig. 2(b) shows that BaCl2 in the LiCl was converted into an oxychloride form (Ba4OCl6), in contrast with the thermodynamic calculation results. According to Nikolaeva et al. [12], Ba4OCl6 is easily formed readily during the reaction between BaO (solid) and BaCl2 (molten). In the reactive distillation test of LiCl containing BaCl2 and Li2CO3, some BaCl2 may be converted into BaCO3, and it is thought that this BaCO3 may then react with residual molten BaCl2 and become converted into Ba4OCl6. It is considered that Ba4OCl6 was formed during the reactive distillation test through this process. These reactions can be expressed as shown below.
(3)4BaCl2 + Li2CO3 = BaCO3 + 3BaCl2 + 2LiCl = Ba4OCl6 + 2LiCl + CO2 (g)
Fig. 2. XRD-patterns of the separated products after the reactive distillation test.
Fig. 3. Thermal mass reductions of SrCO3 under a nitrogen gas condition.
Based on these results, separation tests of the group II nuclides in LiCl and LiCl-KCl eutectic salt using the reactive distillation process were conducted, and the XRD-patterns of the separated products are given in Fig. 4. As shown in Fig. 4, the separated products were identified as SrCO3 and Ba4OCl6 regardless of the type of salt (LiCl and LiCl-KCl), in good agreement with the reactive distillation test results. After the separation test, salt was recovered in a highly purified form (exceeding 99 wt%). The contents of Sr and Ba in the recovered salt were analyzed to calculate their separation efficiency rates. It was found that, the separation efficiency rates of Sr and Ba were close to 99.8 and 99.6 wt%, respectively. These results indicate that group II nuclides can be effectively separated through the reactive distillation process using alkali carbonate.
Fig. 4. XRD-patterns of residue after the separation of group II nuclide in salt using the reactive distillation process.
3.3. Fabrication of the separated group II nuclides into a glass waste form
Because strontium from used nuclear fuel contains a high heat-generative radioisotope (Sr-90), it can be applied to terrestrial and marine uses as a RTG source [13]. After the utilization of Sr-90 RTG, it can be disposed of as a low level radioactive waste [13]. For these reasons, the fabrication of the separated group II nuclides focused on a material with a high content of group II nuclides bearing a glass waste form, in this case the CaO-SrO-BaO-SiO2 system [9]. The compositions for the separated group II nuclides detailed in Table 1 were determined to produce group II nuclide-rich waste form using ORIGEN-S and the CaO-SrO-BaO-SiO2 system. It was assumed that all strontium can be recovered in a form of carbonate in the reactive distillation process (Sr separation efficiency: about 99.8 wt%, as described in section 3.2), and all SrCO3 can be decomposed to SrO during the fabrication, as shown in Fig. 3. It was considered that the weight percent of SrO in the compositions detailed in Table 1 is not changed during the fabrication test because SrO has a very high boiling temperature (about 3200 °C).
According to Table 1, the contents of SrO in GW1 and GW2 were approximately 13.1 and 14.9 wt%, respectively. At these compositions, the heat generations outcomes of GW1 and GW2 can be determined to be approximately 100.0 and 113.2 W, respectively using ORIGEN-S when the waste forms are fabricated with a diameter 100 mm and a height 100 mm [14]. Fig. 5 shows the outer forms and SEM images of GW1 and GW2. It was found that GW1 and GW2 have a homogenous and monolithic form. The XRD-patterns of the waste forms are presented in Fig. 6, and they were identified as a glass form. In this study, the densities of the glass waste forms were measured using the Archimedes method. As a result, the densities of GW1 and GW2 were both approximately 3.2 g/cm3, and this is a sufficiently high value [15]. A relatively high glass-transition temperature is required to maintain a stable waste form from decay heat generated by a heat-generative radioisotope such as Sr-90. The glass-transition temperature of GW1 was measured using TGA-DTA and TMA instruments. As the result, the glass-transition temperature was in a range of 750–780 °C, and this is a greatly high glass transition temperature relative to common glass waste forms having a glass transition temperature below 600 °C [15], [16], [17]. A PCT of the glass waste forms was conducted to evaluate their chemical durability, and the results are given in Table 3. There were no significant differences in the leaching test results between GW1 and GW2, and it was confirmed that the leach-resistance levels for the glass waste forms were much more reasonable when compared with the results of EA (Environmental Assessment) glass [18].
Fig. 5. Photos and SEM images of the glass waste forms.
Fig. 6. XRD-patterns of GW1 and GW2.
Table 3. Results of the PCT leaching test for the glass waste forms [g/m2·day].
Through these results, it is considered that group II nuclides separated in this manner can be fabricated into a homogeneous and chemically durable glass waste form as the CaO-SrO-BaO-SiO2 system, after which the glass waste form can be utilized in RTG applications given its relatively high heat-generation and glass-transition temperature.
4. Conclusions
In this study, the separation of group II nuclides in LiCl or LiCl-KCl eutectic salt was achieved using a reactive distillation process with injection of alkali carbonate as a chemical agent, after which a waste form can be fabricated with high levels of the separated group II nuclides. During the separation of group II nuclides in salt, SrCl2 and BaCl2 were separated into a carbonate form (SrCO3) and an oxychloride form (Ba4OCl6), respectively, and their separation efficiency rates were determined to be more than 99.6 wt%. The separated nuclides were successfully fabricated into a homogeneous and chemically durable glass waste form with a high content (45–50 wt%) of these nuclides as the CaO-SrO-BaO-SiO2 system. It is considered that this glass waste form can be utilized in RTG applications because it has sufficiently high heat-generation and a glass-transition temperature.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant from the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Korean government (MSIP) (No. 2012M2A8A5025700).
