<title>EXAFS investigations of cobalt electrodeposition</title>
<author> Dirk Lützenkirchen-Hecht; Damir Hamulić; Ralph Wagner; Ingrid Milošev</author>
<Affiliation>Fk. 4 – Physik, Bergische Universität Wuppertal, D-42097 Wuppertal, Germany; University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia; Jožef Stefan Institute, Department of Physical and Organic Chemistry, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2018.12.033</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0969806X18306716?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•
Electrodeposition from CoCl2-solution results in metallic Co films with different morphology dependent on the thickness.
•
The growth rate determined from the evaluation of XANES experiments is equal to ca. 2 monolayers per second.
•
Cobalt coordination appears to relax with increasing film thickness.
•
Nanosized morphology may be maintained by repeated pulse deposition for larger film thickness.
Abstract
X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy and scanning electron microscopy were used to study the atomic short range order structure, surface morphology and thickness of cobalt films electrodeposited from CoCl2 solutions on gold-coated Kapton. While the morphology on the electrodeposits strongly depends on the deposition time and thereby on the film thickness, the short range order structure deduced from the X-ray spectroscopic experiments suggests that pure metal films were formed, however with a slight relaxation of the Co-Co bond distances with increasing thickness, which may open new routes for the preparation of nanostructured Co-materials.
Keywords
Co electrodeposition；EXAFS；XANES；Nanostructure；Lattice relaxation
1. Introduction
Electrodeposition (ED) is a simple, flexible and versatile alternative for the synthesis of thin films on conducting or semiconducting substrates in comparison to ultrahigh vacuum techniques. ED offers manifold control of the deposition processes by the choice of the deposition potential and its temporal evolution, the concentration of anions, cations, as well as additives in the solution and its pH and temperature, allowing materials synthesis with tailored properties (Garcia et al., 2013). Cobalt-based material are of high technological interest because of their manifold use e.g. in battery materials, solid-oxide fuel cells, batteries (Zhao et al., 2012) or in magnetic storage (Yoon et al., 2015), to mention just a few. Here we investigate electrodeposits on flexible, gold-coated polymers obtained from CoCl2-solutions and the evolution of their structure and morphology in particular using EXAFS experiments, accompanied by scanning electron microscopy.
2. Experimental details
The Co electrodeposition was done using electrolytes prepared from appropriate amounts of CoCl2 (all from Alfa Aesar) and deionized water (Millipore). Throughout the experiments presented here, 0.02 M solutions with a pH of 5.4 were used. We employed a SimPot 300 potentiostat (M. Schramm, University of Düsseldorf, Germany) and a small electrochemical cell (ca. 25 cm3) with an Au-coated Kapton tape as working electrode, a Pt wire as counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode (0.23 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode, against which all potentials are quoted. After identifying potentials suited for electrodeposition from cyclic voltammograms, the deposition was performed under potentiostatic conditions for the desired time. The samples were subsequently removed from the electrolyte, thoroughly cleaned with deionized water, dried in air and investigated by transmission mode EXAFS at the Co K-edge (7709 eV) at beamline 10 (Lützenkirchen-Hecht et al., 2014) at the DELTA storage ring (Dortmund, Germany) using a Si(111) channel-cut monochromator and gas-filled ionization chambers as detectors. In addition, the samples were investigated using SEM (JEOL JSM6501) and EDX (Thermo Fisher). Up to now, about 25 individual films have been prepared and analysed.
3. Results and discussion
In Fig. 1(a), ex-situ measured X-ray absorption near edge (XANES) data of the Co electrodeposits are presented for different deposition times at −1.11 V, a potential for which only a negligible hydrogen evolution is predicted, while on the other hand strong negative currents related to the Co electrodeposition are measured (Garcia et al., 2013). For all of the measured spectra, the XANES pretty well resemble the spectrum of a Co metal reference foil with a hexagonal close packed structure (space group 194, p6/mmc, (Yoon et al., 2015)), and such a stoichiometry is supported by EDX experiments. The increasing change of the absorption directly at the edge (edge step ΔA) is a measure of the thickness of the deposit. Using t = ΔA/(Δμ·ρ), with Δμ and ρ the tabulated change of the mass absorption coefficient at the Co K-edge (Δμ = 304.4 cm2/g (Saloman et al., 1988)) and the density of Co metal (ρ = 8.9 g/cm3), the thickness t of the deposit can be calculated for the individual depositions. The determined values are plotted in Fig. 1(b) together with a linear regression giving a value for the growth rate of 0.52 ± 0.01 nm/s. This value corresponds to ca. 2 monolayers of Co per second, a reasonable value for a well-controlled thin-film growth.
Fig. 1. (a) Co K-edge near edge X-ray absorption data of Co-electrodeposits prepared at −1.11 V in 0.02 M CoCl2-solution for different deposition times as indicated. (b) Co-thickness as a function of the deposition time at −1.11 V in 0.02 M CoCl2-solution. Each colored data point corresponds to an individual film preparation. From the slope of the straight line fitted to the experimental data, a growth rate of 0.52 ± 0.01 nm/s was calculated. For comparison, the thickness was also estimated from the negative charge measured during electrodeposition (open symbols, grey line). (c) and (d) display SEM micrographs of the deposits after 50 s and 300 s of deposition, respectively. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
For comparison, the film thickness was also calculated from the electrochemical measurements during the deposition. The integration of the electrochemical current density (j) during the time of deposition provides the charge density Q/A = ∫jdt, A being the area of the substrate. Assuming that two electrons are spent for the deposition of each Co-atom according to the reaction scheme
Co2+ + 2e- → Co,
the thickness can also be calculated using t = M/ (2e·NA·ρ)·Q/A, with M and NA the molar mass of Co (M = 58.933 g) and NA Avogrados constant (6.022·1023 atoms per mole), respectively. As can be seen in Fig. 1(b), the thickness values estimated from the electrochemical measurements are systematically larger compared to the results of the X-ray analysis, suggesting that a substantial fraction of the electrochemical current does not contribute to the film deposition. Having in mind that the Nernst equilibrium potential for hydrogen evolution amounts to about −0.5 V for the electrolyte used here, a substantial contribution from hydrogen evolution may be expected for a deposition at −1.11 V accordingly (see e.g. Kongstein et al., 2007; Garcia et al., 2008), i.e. the deposition efficiency decreases to ca. 75–80%.
The structure and morphology of the deposits is illustrated in Fig. 1(c) and (d) for two selected deposition times of 50 s and 300 s, respectively, illustrating that the grain size of the deposits changes from a needle-like shape with about 50 nm length and only 10 nm in diameter, to small, approximately spherical crystallites and a broader size distribution with a maximum lateral size of ca. 800 nm for the larger deposition time.
In Fig. 2, results of an EXAFS fit performed using the Artemis software (Ravel and Newville, 2005) for a sample deposited for 300 s and a nominal thickness of ca. 140 ± 5 nm are shown. For the fit we have assumed the hcp-space group no. 194 with lattice constants a = b = 2.505 Å, c = 4.0695 Å and angles α = β = 90°, γ = 120°. All coordinations up to a radius of 5.9 Å with respect to the central atom were included in the fit; such a cluster contains 69 atoms and comprises 7 single scattering and 21 multiple scattering paths. We have assumed a global lattice expansion parameter (α), and a Debye-model (Sevillano et al., 1979) was used to quantitatively account for systematic changes of the mean squared relative displacement σ2 (Debye-Waller factor) as a function of the path length. Here the Debye-temperature ΘD served as fit parameter. Due to the prominent nearest neighbour peak at 2.15 Å, additional fit parameters were used for the nearest neighbour bond distance R1 and the disorder (σ12) of the first shell. Due to the precise calibration of each of the measured X-ray spectra within about +/- 0.2 eV, it was possible to determine the value for the inner potential shift ΔE0 for all spectra simultaneously, resulting in a value of ΔE0 = 7.44 ± 0.42 eV. Such an approach minimized the correlation between the shifts of the bond distances and the values for ΔE0, making the obtained fit results especially for the interatomic distances much more reliable. Finally an amplitude reduction factor S02 was used individually for each of the considered absorption spectra. It should be mentioned that the variation of the obtained values for S02 is small as well, ranging from 0.68 to 0.78, so that it might also be useful to fit S02 as a generalized parameter for all data sets to further reduce correlation effects in the fits in the future. In total only 6 independent fit parameters were used, so that, in relation to the number of independent data points Nidp = 28 resulting from the used large ranges in k- and R-space, the fits appear statistically meaningful. As can be exemplarily seen in Fig. 2, the experimental data are well reproduced by the fit in the entire k- and R-space investigated. Typical values for the ℜ-factor of the obtained fits range between fit 0.006 and 0.010.
Fig. 2. Magnitude of the Fourier-transforms |FT(k3*χ(k))| of the EXAFS data an electrodeposited Co-film with a nominal thickness of 485 nm. The experimental data (•) as well as the fit (—) using the structure of hcp-cobalt are displayed. In the insert, the back-transformed data in k-space are shown. The k-range for the Fourier-transform is 2.7 Å−1 < k < 14.0 Å−1 and the fit was performed in a radial distance of 1.1–5.5 Å with an ℜ-factor of 0.007. The determined values are R1 = 2.493 ± 0.001 Å, σ12 = 6.56·10−3 ± 3.13·10−4 Å2, ΘD = 369 ± 10 K, α = -2.54·10−5 ± 7.18·10−4, S02 = 0.74 ± 0.03 and ΔE0 = 7.44 ± 0.42 eV.
A compilation of fit results for the nearest neighbour bond distance R1, the related mean squared displacement σ12, as well as the Debye-temperature ΘD obtained from fitting the EXAFS data for films of different thickness is presented in Fig. 3. As can be seen, the Co-Co distance R1 slightly decreases with the thickness of the deposits, from about 2.495 Å ± 0.003 Å for a film thickness of 140 nm to about 2.492 Å ± 0.002 Å for 3.2 µm thickness, and a value slightly below 2.488 Å for the Co metal reference material. In contrast, the values determined for σ12 do not change systematically with film thickness with an average value of 6.6·10−3 Å2 (Fig. 3(b)) and also the determined Debye-temperatures do not show a systematic trend, with an average value of ≈369 K, which is slightly below the value of ΘD = 386 K reported in the literature (Ho et al., 1974). Furthermore also the lattice expansion seems to decrease with increasing film thickness, suggesting a trend consistent to that found for the nearest neighbour bond distance R1 (Fig. 3(a)).
Fig. 3. Compilation of fit results obtained from a detailed analysis of the EXAFS data: evaluation of (a) the nearest neighbour bond distance R1, (b) the mean squared relative displacement σ12 related to the first shell, (c) the Debye-temperature, and (d) the lattice expansion α for Co metal films electrodeposited from CoCl2 solutions for different deposition times as a function of the resulting film thickness. The dashed lines are meant to guide the eye. The fit residues are ℜ = 0.0103 and 0.0156 (thickness t = 140 nm), 0.0071 (t = 485 nm), 0.0064 (t = 1.85 µm), 0.0057 and 0.0063 (t = 3.27 µm) and 0.0070 for the Co reference foil, respectively.
These results suggest that the lattice of the electrodeposits relaxes during film growth, with slightly larger Co-Co bond lengths for the smaller crystallites. These thin layers obey substantial contributions from needle-like shaped crystallites with diameters in the range from 20 to 50 nm only (see Fig. 1(c)), in contrast to the spherical particles observed for larger film thickness (Fig. 1(d)). It is worth to note here that increased bond lengths have also been observed for vacuum deposited Bi (Lisgarten et al., 1974) and Pt (Gruber et al., 2011) thin films, with a thickness in the range from few nm up to 40 nm. For electrodeposited metals it is well known that the incorporated stress depends on bath temperature, deposition speed, anions and additives in the solution as well as on the thickness of the deposits (see e.g. refs. Bhandari et al., 2009; Saitou et al., 2008; Chason et al., 2013). Therefore it appears likely that the measured relaxation of the bond length is linked to the change of the morphology of the Co electrodeposits. To foster the trends observed here, it would be desirable to perform EXAFS experiments on Co films with a smaller film thickness in the range well below 100 nm. Up to now, however, it was only possible to measure XANES data of those films with sufficient data quality, however more sophisticated grazing incidence EXAFS experiments are planned for future investigations of Co electrodeposits.
4. Conclusions
XANES and EXAFS studies have shown that Cobalt electrodeposition from 0.02 M CoCl2 solution leads to Co-metal deposits. The short range order structure of the deposits was evaluated for films in the thickness range from ca. 10 nm to about 3 µm, giving rise to small structural modifications as the film grows. In particular, the results of EXAFS data fitting suggests that the Co lattice slightly relaxes with increasing film thickness.
Slightly larger lattice constants were found for smaller film thickness in the sub-micron range with predominantly nanosized needle-like shaped deposits, in contrast to microscale spherical crystallites at larger film thickness with accordingly smaller Co-Co distances close to the bulk value. The obtained results suggest the opportunity to prepare films with nanosized morphology by repeated depositions of short (up to 50 s) electrochemical pulses, thereby obtaining thicker films with special morphologies.
Acknowledgements
D. Hamulić acknowledges the financial support from the Erasmus student exchange program for his visit in Wuppertal. We gratefully acknowledge the DELTA machine group (Dortmund) for providing synchrotron radiation reliably.
