<title>Review of the microheterogeneous thoria‐urania fuel for micro‐sized high temperature reactors</title>
<author>Rabir Mohamad Hairie; Ismail Aznan Fazli; Yahya Mohd Syukri</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Science Program, Faculty of Science and Technology Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia ; Reactor Technology Centre Malaysian Nuclear Agency ; Nuclear Technology Research Centre, Faculty of Science and Technology Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia ; College of Engineering Universiti Tenaga Nasional (UNITEN)</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/ER.5923</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.5923</URL>
Summary
This paper presents a systematic review of the micro-modular thorium-fueled high temperature reactors (HTR) loaded with duplex fuel pellet design. Specifically, each unique criterion of the design is discussed separately in an attempt to understand the combined advantages of the proposed reactor. Micro modular HTRs have great potential as a source of electricity or industrial heat in the future. The use of thorium not only improves its economic performance and safety, but also prolongs its operation. Nevertheless, the traditional seed-and-blanket configuration would not be able to maximize the thorium fuel burnup. As such, a new tristructural-isotopic (TRISO) fuel based on duplex pellet designs were proposed instead. It should be noted that these duplex pellets were not practical for pressurized water reactor (PWR) technology due to its uneven power distribution which possibly leads to a very high local pellet temperature. However, this unorthodox inherent characteristics of the duplex pellets may actually suit the HTR burnup profile better due to its substantially higher thermal margin - thus possibly enabling a relatively long operation of the HTR. The paper shall thereby provide a reasonably sound justification for the detailed technical investigations of the proposed reactor design.
1 INTRODUCTION
Nuclear power is an integral part of the low-carbon energy solution in the fast growing carbon-constrained world. In the 1970s and 1980s, the use of nuclear power rapidly increased to reach global installed capacity around 400 GWe. New plant construction had been very effective in state-supported nuclear power programs as seen in China and South Korea, with China is currently on course to double its nuclear generation capacity from 27 GWe to 54 GWe by 2020.1 At the same time, innovation in nuclear plant technologies continues towards faster construction, simpler operation, and inherently safer designs. With regards to faster construction, the main idea is to complete most of the construction works at the factory production line instead of at the plant site in order to reduce costs and improve quality control. In addition, shortening construction period is also desirable, as 80% of total nuclear power plant (NPP) lifecycle cost are incurred during construction. Any delay during construction could therefore inadvertently increase the total cost of the reactor financing.1
With regards to simpler operation and inherently safer designs, the main approach is to scale-down the reactor capacity: per International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)'s definition, a small-sized reactor is a reactor with an electrical power production equivalent to 300 MWe or smaller. In fact, Small Modular Reactor (SMR) has been in the development since the 1950s.2 The IAEA has also listed features of SMRs that will possibly advance the reactor technological development further, in particular: (a) made and pre-installed in factory to reduce costs, shorten construction period and improve quality control, (b) a non-complex design that reduces risk of accidents caused by human errors as well as simplifies requirement for operation and maintenance, (c) suitable for small, decentralized electrical grids and can additionally be used as an industrial heat source or seawater distillation plant, (d) has a relatively long core cycle of up to 5 years which thereby improves its competitiveness in terms of economy and energy security, and (e) reduces the amounts of nuclear wastes and fuel requirements, which in turns simplifies the complexity of waste and fuel managements.2
One of the subsets of SMR is the micro-sized modular reactor (MMR) which has an electrical output of less than 30 MWe. Due to its sheer micro-size, MMR is possibly capable of operating independently without centralized grid connection as well as supplying continuous power in normal and emergency conditions. MMR is also designed with futuristic features such as unmanned operations, capability to function as a blackstart resource (ie, as an external power source to support power systems affected by natural disasters), and minimal accident risk. In addition, due to the small volume and mass, most parts of the MMR can be built in a factory and are transportable via existing infrastructure.3 There are more than 12 competing MMR designs currently under development with the expected first commercial operation date around mid-2020s.4
The most commonly-studied MMR type is the High-Temperature Reactor (HTR)5 due of its potential and suitability as a candidate for the micro-sized reactor. The HTR is also claimed to be the leading innovative reactor design as it can be deployed within a decade.6 In addition, a number of studies published within the last 30 years had confirmed the inherent safety features of the small modular HTRs.7 The HTR could also be utilized to co-generate industrial heat along with electricity production.8 Although the HTR is a relatively mature candidate for MMR in terms of design and technology, relevant research and development activities are still necessary to improve its fuel burnup performance.9 Reason for this is that the neutron economy of a smaller-sized reactor is worse than that of a large commercial reactor due to its larger neutron leakage.10, 11 Consequently, its burnup performance suffers, making it difficult to achieve a long core cycle length.10, 12 Therefore, small-sized reactors are most likely to be operated with a relatively reduced power density to extend its operational cycle. In turn, this slows down the burnup13 and thereby decreases its fuel economics compared to the commercial reactors.2
The Micro Modular HTR (MMR-HTR) could possibly use thorium fuel to improve its burnup performance and thereby extend its core cycle length and.14, 15 Thorium-based fuel provides a range of advantages over all-Uranium traditional fuel. The 233U isotope produced as a result of 232Th transmutation chain has superior fissile neutronic properties. It should be noted that 233U emits more neutrons16 per absorption than 235U, which consequently encourages a high fertile to fissile conversion in the thermal spectrum reactors and thus increase the usage of fuel resources.14 Early thorium reactor design utilized highly enriched uranium as neutron seeds, which later transmute fertile 232Th into fissile 233U. Therefore, high initial investment of fissile 235U (or plutonium) is necessary to maintain the core criticality while sufficiently breeding 233U. On the other hand, due to the proliferation concern, modern thorium reactor design is limited to <20 wt% 235U/U (ie, low enrichment uranium, LEU). This, in turn, leads to a bigger portion of 238U that possibly breeds plutonium, which compromises thorium's inherent proliferation advantages.14 Therefore, it is more advantageous to consume the newly-bred fuels in-situ in a once-through cycle than to undergo the much complicated fuel reprocessing requirement.
However, the use of thorium in a conventional seed-and-blanket configuration relies on the ability to reshuffle the seed region or replace it with fresh fuel, which is not compatible with once-through cycle operation.17 Besides, there is also a problem related to the high power peaking.18 In addition, using a homogeneous fuel design would lead to a slow conversion of 232Th to 233U for the once-through cycle core design and require a relatively high enrichment of uranium seeds.19 In-situ 233U burning in the uranium-thorium cycle also results in high fuel utilization, especially in HTR, where the thorium portion is consumed effectively.14 However, with the reduced enrichment of uranium, long and multiple cycles of thorium-fuel irradiation is needed to produce sufficient amount of 233U for commercial operation using the seed-and-blanket or the homogenous fuel.20-23 The use of duplex fuel is therefore suggested where it has the potential to offer a higher fuel discharge burnup, improve the power peaking and help solve the 233U conversion issues.11, 24 The duplex pellet configurations were in fact introduced into the light water breeder reactors (LWBR)14 back in the 1970s and 1980s, such as in the Advanced Water Breeder (AWBA) program where the fuels underwent irradiation testing at the Shippingport nuclear plant from 1977 to 1982.25
It should be pointed out that the investigation of thorium fuel conversion in a Micro Modular HTR is not common. In fact, this paper could be the only one that presents a systematic review of the use of the duplex fuel pellets in a micro-sized modular thorium HTR. In particular, this paper discusses each of the unique design characteristics separately and in sequence; first, fundamentals of thorium fuel and its reactor technology, including the seed-and-blanket configuration, were presented. The paper subsequently studies the duplex fuel pellet: its design, historical development and technical issues. The authors would then present basics of HTR thorium technology, and relevant technical challenges in loading duplex thorium fuel pellets into MMR-HTR. This discussion includes proposed design and analysis tools to model the duplex pellets utilization inside the thorium-uranium breeder reactors. Summaries of the study follow at the end.
2 THORIUM-FUELED REACTOR
2.1 Thorium 2as fuel
Thorium is one of the few fertile elements used in a nuclear power plant. In fact, thorium fuel cycle was initially pursued to prevent natural uranium shortages in the event of a projected rapid growth in nuclear power.26-28 This is due to the amount of naturally existing thorium is excessively more abundant than uranium with the total confirmed uranium reserve worldwide was estimated at 7 million tons while speculated thorium reserves was about 10 million tons. Therefore, there should be sufficient thorium available to meet the increasing demand for energy worldwide.27, 28 In addition, uranium supply was expected to be depleted within 80 years unless new sources of uranium, such as seawater uranium, could economically be extractable.29, 30 As a matter of fact, uranium reserves in seawater were, estimated in theory, one thousand times larger than conventional uranium reserve.31
Thorium is a fertile element that, after absorbing neutrons, produces fissile material 233U in a chain of nuclear transmutations via two beta decays as represented in the following equation29, 32-34:
@(1)
The isotope 232Th has in fact been studied as a supplement to uranium sources since the start of nuclear reactor development in the 1950s, and its advantages as nuclear fuels were actually demonstrated in a number of reactor experiments up until 1970s.34 Previous studies clearly showed that thorium fuel could extend the duration of a reactor core cycle.35 Besides, thorium reactor core was also more stable than uranium core since it was shown to have smaller fluctuations in reactivity and power distribution over the core lifespan. In addition, thorium in-situ breeding was stronger than that of the uranium. Thorium and its oxides also showed better irradiation performance than that of the uranium and its oxides, which results in longer extended burnups. Furthermore, thorium and its oxide also have higher melting points (3300°C for ThO2 and 2700°C for UO2) and thermal conductivities than the uranium and its oxide.36
In terms of economics, IAEA estimated that the cost of uranium may increase dramatically over the next 10 to 20 years as there was a recent sharp increase in global nuclear power development. In fact, price of uranium already increased ten times over a five year period between 2007 and 2012.37 Nonetheless, following Fukushima Daichi accident in 2011 and with the additional cost of making NPPs Fukushima-compliant, deploying nuclear power could possibly cost a lot more than conventional fossil power for countries with coal and gas reserves. As such, uranium price hikes and unfavorable market conditions may affect thorium's competitiveness as nuclear fuels for the next generation NPPs such as HTR.37 At the present time, cost of 1 kg UO2 (front end fuel cycle fuel costs) is US$1390.38 As uranium is still needed as a seed in the thorium reactor, the use of thorium may thereby add to the overall cost of the nuclear fuels with the price of 1 kg ThO ranges between US$501.18 and US$553.17 (thorium extraction from monazite).29 However, the costs are expected to decline in the long term as the frequency of uranium fuel refueling can be gradually reduced. Ideally, the newly-bred 233U should replace some of the 235U and 241Pu during the entire thorium reactor cycle.
2.2 Fuel type and reactor technology
Thorium reactor designs pursue the use of thorium in various forms, for example molten thorium salt fuel (ThF4 or ThCl4), or solid fuel (ThO2) in HTR and light-water reactors (LWR).39 Table 1 highlights utilization of thorium fuels in past experimental and power reactors around the globe.
TABLE 1. Use of thorium fuels in past experimental and nuclear power reactors40
Startup	Name	Type	Country	Fuel	Seed fuel
1962	Indian Point 1	PWR	US	Oxide pellet	U-233
1963	Elk River	BWR	US	Oxide pellet	U-235
1964	MSRE ORNL	MSR	US	Molten fluoride	U-233
1966	Dragon	HTGR	UK	Coated fuel particle, Oxide, Dicarbide	U-233
1966	Peach Bottom	HTGR	US	Coated fuel particle, Oxide, Dicarbide	U-235
1967	AVR	HTGR	German	Coated fuel particle, Oxide, Dicarbide	U-235
1976	Fort St Vrain	HTGR	US	Coated fuel particle, Dicarbide	U-235
1977	Shippingport	PWR	US	Oxide pellet	U-233
1985	THTR 300	HTGR	German	Coated fuel particle, Oxide, Dicarbide	U-235
Research on the use of thorium-based fuels in heavy water reactors has also been conducted in Canada and India over the last 10 years. Thorium reactor studies in India focus on the development of 3-stage nuclear program. In the first stage, natural uranium was used as fuel in the pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR), which would then produce 239Pu. In the second stage, 239Pu and the depleted uranium were used to fuel fast-breeder reactor (FBR) where thorium fuel was irradiated. The FBR will produce an excess of 239Pu and convert 232Th to fissile 233U. The last stage is to develop a 233U/Th self-sustaining system, preferably for the Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR).41 Moreover, the current AHWR design focuses on the loading pattern of the fuel cluster using homogeneous (Th-U) and (Th-Pu) fuel.42 In Canada, thorium fuel development for the Canada Deuterium Uranium (CANDU) reactors is more geared towards fabricating thoria-based fuels using gel-sol method and plutonium as fuel driver.43 Another “duplex” fuel developed by Atomic Energy of Canada Limited (AECL) is the thoria fuel pellet fabricated through the addition of fissile component using impregnation method. Fissile element is homogenized with non-uniform distribution in the thoria pellet where the periphery is richly-loaded with fissile elements.44 However, this design of thoria-urania fuel mixing is beyond the scope of this paper and is therefore not covered in this publication.
Interestingly, LWR was one of the pioneering reactors to utilize thorium as fuels: 28 MWe Elk River boiling water reactor (BWR) between 1962 and 1968 and 270 MWe Indian Point I between 1962 and 1965. Furthermore, the 70 MWe Shippingport Power Station was once ran on thorium as an experimental LWBR with a seed-and-blank configuration from 1977 to 1982. It was the first plant to successfully demonstrate thorium-fueled pressurized water reactor (PWR) for commercial power generation.45 Section 3 presents detailed discussion of this thorium-fueled PWR core configuration.
The first high-temperature gas-cooled reactor (HTGR) was UK's 20 MWth Dragon Test Reactor that used mixed uranium-thorium oxide and dicarbide-coated fuel particles in a graphite matrix. Meanwhile in the USA, 40 MWe Peach Bottom HTGR prototype was the first thorium gas-cooled graphite-moderated system, which was operated between 1966 and 1974, generating 1400 GWh of electricity with 70% availability factor. From 1976 to 1989, 300 MWe Fort St Vrain, an industrial follow-up reactor, produced a total of 6000 GWh electricity on a Th-235U carbide fuel coated in microspheres with silicon oxide and pyrolytic carbon.45 Both reactors were of HTR prismatic block types. The first pebble-bed thorium reactor was 64 MWth Arbeitsgemeinschaft Versuchsreaktor (AVR) which began its operation in 1967. The initial core used (Th,U)C2 kernels with two-layered pyrocarbon coatings. The next pebble-bed thorium reactor was later built in the 1970s, which was the 300 MWe Thorium High-Temperature Reactor (THTR) operated during the 1980s. Throughout its lifetime from its first criticality in 1983 to its shutdown in 1988, THTR used a two-layer Biso fuel particle coating (Th, U)O2.46 Section 4 presents further discussions on the features and strengths of this HTR.
3 THORIUM SEED-AND-BLANKET METHOD
3.1 Heterogeneous arrangement
As a nuclear fuel, thorium is typically used in either homogenous or heterogeneous arrangement. It is noted that heterogeneous fuel arrangement, in which there is clear separation of thorium and uranium fuels, offers more efficient production of 233U since competing neutron absorption between 238U and 232Th is avoided.47 On the other hand, homogeneous mixture of UO2-ThO2 fuel cycle was found to be significantly costlier due to its poor neutronic performance and the needs for additional separate work units (SWUs). One of the most well-known heterogeneous thorium fuel configurations is Radkowsky's “seed-and-blanket” concept, in which the fuel assembly consists of a uranium fuel rod (“the neutron seed”) surrounded by a “blanket” of a thorium rod that absorbs neutrons and subsequently breeds 233U.48
The aforementioned seed-and-blanket arrangement especially contains distinct compartmentalization of UO2 and ThO2 at any of the fuel levels: pellet, pin, or assembly. This spatial separation of uranium and thorium helps to increase the efficiency of 233U breeding. It is also possible to implement this approach on a micro- or macro-scale. Separation of uranium from thorium within a fuel assembly or a fuel rod occurs on the micro-scale while the macro-heterogeneous fuel concept pursues spatial separation at the fuel assembly level.14 There are two possible heterogeneous designs: the aforementioned Seed-Blanket Unit (SBU) concept also known as Radkowsky Thorium Fuel (RTF) or MIT's Whole Assembly Seed-and-Blanket (WASB) concept as shown in Figure 1.34 In comparison to RTF, the WASB concept enables simpler fuel fabrication and in-core fuel management.49
FIGURE 1
A, Whole assembly seed-and-blanket and B, seed-blanket unit fuel design concepts [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
3.2 Issues related to optimization
The optimal use of thorium as nuclear fuels can be achieved in a heterogeneous configuration. However, this would require the heterogeneous seed-and-blanket arrangements to depend on replacing the seed with fresh fuels, which negates the intent of a single fuel batch or a once-through cycle operation.11 One important issue identified during the early development of thorium fuel for LWR was that in order to increase 233U breeding rate, either a very high power density (higher than conventional) or a very high seed enrichment is required. The required power density may not be technically obtainable with high thorium fraction in the core for efficient breeding. This was due to the fact that at the beginning of the cycle (BOC), relatively high fractional power exists in the seed region to enable high breeding, which adversely results in a significantly high UO2 temperature. Without high power density and high enrichment in the seed region, it may take inefficiently long period of irradiation to sufficiently breed 233U from 232Th which in turn negatively affects the overall fuel economy.20-23 During thorium irradiation for breeding, either very high amount of seed is needed to ensure a single-batch operation or the thorium needs to remain very long in the reactor core to endure multiple seed refueling cycles to enable sufficient 233U breeding for the in-situ burning.50-52 As such, the seed-and-blanket configuration may not be practical for a once-through cycle core.
One approach to optimize the use of thorium fuels (ie, extended burnup and longer core duration) is to increase the fertile-capture-to-fissile-absorption ratio so that the conversion ratio (CR) from fertile to fissile increases as well.11 The optimal choice of seed composition, fuel assembly design and core configuration, together with correct selection of neutron reflector are among of the chief design considerations to improve these ratios. Examples of seed elements other than the 235U is 233U, which has a higher reproduction factor value, η (the average number of neutrons from fission per neutron absorbed by fuel) than other fissile materials. This possibly ensures extended fuel burnup and increased breeding rate of 233U from 232Th.53, 54 Alternatively, innovative fuel design such as duplex fuel pellet could be used to extend ThO2 burnup.11, 14, 17, 23, 47, 54-56
Meanwhile, thermal breeding is practically difficult for a small reactor due to its relatively high neutron leakage. Nonetheless, it is theoretically interesting and can help encourage the advancement of the thorium fuel development.
3.3 Duplex fuel pellet
The duplex pellet concept was introduced following the development of the seed-and-blanket configuration for thorium-fueled PWR reactor. Initial design of the duplex pellet consists of an inner ThO2 layer and an outer UO2 layer, as shown in Figure 2A.23 To extend the burnup and increase the CR value, the duplex pellet was later inversely arranged (Figure 2B), in which UO2 and ThO2 are positioned inside and outside, respectively.14
FIGURE 2
Duplex pellet designs
Another viable improvement in the duplex pellet design was the change of the pellet's geometrical dimensions, in particular thickness of each layer. In the previously documented study14, thickness of the outer ThO2 layer was reduced from 1.76 mm to 0.357 mm which results in a more uniform radial power distribution across the pellet and a lower peak pellet temperature.11 Fissile loading of the duplex pellet was later estimated from the enrichment sensitivity tests. A higher enrichment was expected due to the lower UO2 volume and the higher thermal neutron absorption of fertile 232Th.11 The use of duplex pellet designs also improves the ratio of neutron capture in fertile material to neutron absorption in fissile material which leads to an extended fuel burnup and core lifetime.11, 57, 58 This has been demonstrated by previous work on duplex pellet utilization in PWR combined with axial pellet arrangement and checkboard rod configuration, which shows a 15% increase in burnup.14 The conversion ratio for duplex fuel in the respective fast, epithermal or thermal ranges is 3%, 8% and 10% higher than those of the conventional UO2 pellet. This indicates a higher breeding capacity, smaller core reactivity swing and longer core cycle.11 The duplex is also used for the design of the SMR core with a high power density of 100 MW/m3.58
To demonstrate the design advantage of the duplex pellets, a neutronic study was previously performed on four PWR fuel assembly configurations, as shown in Figure 3. Figure 3B depicts a 12 × 12 seed-blanket fuel assembly with standard PWR fuel pin.47 It consists of 32 seed rods loaded at the center and 112 blanket rods loaded at the periphery. The burnup calculations were made with 233U concentrated in the seed region, while maintaining the same amount of 233U from the reference case (Figure 3A). It was shown that the reactivity swing for Figure 3B case was significantly reduced from the reference homogeneous case. In addition, the depicted reactivity letdown curve is also representative of typical high-conversion systems. Meanwhile, Figure 3C is a slight modification of Figure 3B case in which radius of the blanket fuel pellet was increased from 0.4095 to 0.55 cm that effectively increases resonance absorption in thorium as well. The same burnup calculations were performed while maintaining the mass ratio of 233U to 232Th as that in the reference case. The reactivity letdown curve was relatively flatter in the case of Figure 3C and D. As such, it was expected that the use of duplex pellets to replace the seed in the fuel assembly may result in a similar reactivity behavior to Figure 3C but with a higher CR.
FIGURE 3
A quarter fuel assembly layout comparison; A, Reference 17x17 fuel assembly of Th-233U. B, 12x12 seed and blanket fuel assembly. C, 12x12 seed and blanket fuel assembly with larger blanket rods. D, 12x12 seed and blanket assembly with duplex rods replacing seed rods and larger blanket rods47
3.4 Drawbacks of duplex pellet in PWR
There are two major challenges associated with the development of duplex pellet design: (a) rate of fission reactions in the UO2 portion is double of the conventional pellets, making it more fragile, and (b) complexity of duplex pellet manufacturing.23 The first issue is related to the imbalance in the power distribution due to the difference in fissile material mass distribution. This problem results in the deterioration of heat transfer efficiency since heat generated in seed has to travel across blanket and cladding prior to reaching coolant. As such, most energy released from fission remain concentrated in the seed region, causing the regional temperature to be uncomfortably high. Hence, it was necessary to reduce the core power density in order to control the power peaking within the duplex pellet, especially in the early stages of the core cycle.54 Interestingly, the production and accumulation of 233U in the blanket layer at the end of the core cycle helps to reduce this power distribution imbalance. Nonetheless, the use of thorium fuel cannot be maximized with the low power density requirement. In addition, temperature of the UO2 region is significantly higher than that of the conventional pellets unless some fissile materials like 233U is mixed to the blanket ThO2 layer to balance the power distribution. This will, however, reduce the CR value and thorium accumulated burnup value.14
Another technical challenge related to the use of duplex pellets in PWR is in the difficulty of extending the fuel burnup. The typical discharge fuel burnup of commercial LWR fuels is around 50 GWd/tU. With modernization of the reactor fleets, particularly with the optimization of burnable absorbers, these same reactors can now possibly reach 60 GWd/tU. In fact, a number of independent studies suggest that the LWR fuel burnup could even reach 70 GWd/tU with the existing enrichment cap (5 wt %).59 The remaining factors that limit LWR fuel discharge burnup are structural damage and trapping of fission products in the fuel pellets. During operation, the aggregation of fission products inside the fuel rods negatively affect thermal conductivity of the fuel pellets, raising the rod centerline temperature and, thus, reducing the margin to melting. Increased fuel temperature and severe irradiation damage can also cause the fuel pellets to swell, which in turn results in a cladding failure.60 As such, the use of duplex fuel pellets in PWRs is in fact limited by the reactor technology itself. It is therefore paramount to investigate alternative use of the duplex pellets in other reactor technology, such as HTR. However, the research on the use of double-layered ThO2-UO2 duplex fuel design in other reactor types outside of PWRs is not substantial.
4 HTR
4.1 HTR Core and Fuel
One major design advantage of HTR over PWR is that its moderator (graphite) and coolant (helium) can operate without experiencing degradation at high temperatures. The HTR core can also withstand a coolant failure accident because it can tolerate an increase in the internal temperature.61 The HTR system also has about 45% ~ 50% thermal efficiency, higher than the typical 30% efficiency of PWR, since the reactor is operated at an improved thermodynamic condition (ie, 100 bar and 900°C).62, 63 In comparison to the PWR, HTR has a greater potential as industrial heat source and hydrogen gas producer as its output temperature of 900°C is much higher than that of the PWR (300°C).62-65 There are two common HTR core designs namely a prismatic carbon fuel block and a continuously moving spherical pebble-bed fuel, as shown in Figure 4. The latter design utilizing a pebble-bed reactor can be loaded randomly online during operation.66 Apart from producing output temperatures as high as 2.5 times of that of the commercial PWR reactor, the real objective of pursuing this type of reactor is due to its enhanced tristructural-isotopic (TRISO) fuel safety features compared to the traditional UO2 pellet design.
FIGURE 4
A, Prismatic HTR reactor core. B, Prismatic fuel block. C, Pebble-bed reactor core and D, Pebble-bed fuel sphere [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The aforementioned pebble-bed HTR core utilizes TRISO fuel which consists of carbon-coated uranium and silicon carbide layers, as shown in Figure 5. This TRISO-coated particle has a 1 mm diameter UO2 kernel inside a porous graphite buffer that functions as the first shield to minimize radiation damage to the kernel as well as to provide space for fission product gasses. The coatings around the buffer are inner pyrolytic carbonate layer (IPyC), a silicon carbide layer (SiC), and outer high-density pyrolytic carbonate layer (OPyC).
FIGURE 5
TRISO particles: schematic layout and loading scheme within the prismatic blocks and pebble-bed sphere fuels [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
4.2 Thorium-fueled HTR
The HTR systems are capable of various fuel cycle scenarios, including thorium cycles and deep burning of minor actinides.67 Early HTR technology actually ran on a mixture of thorium and highly-enriched uranium. Later, most HTR systems switched to lowly-enriched uranium after 1980.68 The HTR can also support Th-Pu fuel cycle to possibly burn Pu and actinide contents from spent nuclear fuels. In addition, the irradiation of plutonium to maintain the thorium-fueled HTR core criticality also helps to reduce the use of uranium.69, 70 A number of studies also suggest the potential of thorium as fuels in HTR to realize the desirable long-cycle operation without the need to be shut down for refueling.62, 71-74
The prismatic block type HTR has several advantages over the pebble-bed type in terms of extended thorium consumption as it has structured loading patterns which are easier for analysis.25 In addition to the historical thorium HTR as shown in Table 1, there is a more recent thorium prismatic block type HTR under development since 1993, which is the 600 MWth Gas-Turbine-Modular Helium Reactor (GT-MHR). This is a small modular reactor with negative temperature reactivity coefficients at all conditions and theoretically capable of achieving 50% thermal efficiency when combined with a direct gas turbine. Although the primary focus of the GT-MHR is to burn surplus military-grade plutonium, the reactor can also be used in high CR thorium fuel cycles.45
4.3 Micro modular HTR: U-Battery
There are a number of ongoing research and development activities to design micro-sized modular HTRs as listed in Table 2. These competing HTR designs aim to fulfill its main function which is to generate energy for a wide range of purposes, as well as to be more flexible, portable and cost-effective. All of these attributes render HTR as one of the most popular technologies for micro-sized reactor designs.75 It was documented that micro-sized HTRs may be able to run continuously for 5 years without refueling; in essence, the reactor practically works like a battery which helps to simplify core and fuel management.76 This small modular reactor core simply needs to be transported to the manufacturers for replacement with a new module.77
TABLE 2. On-going Micro-HTRs Projects (as of April 2020)78
Name	Capacity (MWe)	Type	Developer
Starcore	20	HTR Pebble-Bed	Starcore, Quebec
USNC MMR-5&10	5	HTR Prismatic	UltraSafe Nuclear, USA
U-Battery	4	HTR Prismatic	Urenco-led consortium, UK
U-Battery is a micro-sized HTR prismatic block reactor type loaded with thorium fuel and has been in development since 2008. It has similar safety and technological features as the GT-MHR; they both incorporate the same arrangement of seed-and-blanket fuel blocks.7, 75, 79-86 It is also said that the U-Battery has the biggest potential for commercialization compared to other micro-HTR reactors.87
The U-Battery core is able to run continuously for 5 ~ 10 years at an operating power of 10 ~ 20 MWth.7, 81 The reactor employs the seed-and-blanket arrangement for the fuel block loading pattern as shown in Figure 6. The respective width and height of the fuel block are 36 and 80 cm. Each fuel block consists of 216 fuel and 108 coolant channels. In each fuel channel, there are 15 TRISO fuel compacts of either UO2 or ThO2 fuel kernels. Radii of the fuel kernel and fuel compact are 0.25 mm and 0.6225 cm, respectively, with TRISO particle packing fraction about 0.3. Diameters of the fuel and coolant channels are 1.27 and 1.88 cm, respectively. The fuel block has nine channel layers between peripheries and center. ThO2 fuel compacts are loaded from the first to the fifth layers, while UO2 fuel compacts with up to 20 wt% 235U/U are loaded into the remaining fuel layers. Fissile 235U is used as the fuel driver material or seed which initiates fission reactions inside the fuel block, whereas fertile 238U and 232Th act as the fuel blankets.83
FIGURE 6
U-Battery seed-and-blanket fuel block configuration [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The reactor core is composed of graphite blocks and fuel blocks as shown in Figure 7. The cylindrical and annular reactor core configuration are consisted of 37 or 30 columns of fuel blocks, respectively. As shown in Figure 7, the 37 × 4 core layout, which is the reference configuration, represents 37 fuel columns with each fuel column containing four fuel blocks and seven graphite columns in the center.81 During a cycle of up to 10 years, a reactivity swing of as low as 0.1 ∆k was achieved by optimizing loading pattern of the ThO2 fuel rods and UO2 rods in the block and by manipulating the TRISO fuel particle sizes. Besides, volumetric ratio of TRISO particle to fuel block should always be maintained at 200 ~ 400 to minimize the magnitude of burnup reactivity swing over the 10-year core cycle.82 The goal of this thorium-fueled U-Battery is to reduce fuel costs and to minimize the reactivity swing without too much of the reactivity penalty inherent to the use of burnable poisons. Supposedly if thorium is as costly as uranium, the Th-U seed-and-blanket fuel block may roughly be one-third cheaper than 100% uranium fuel block.76
FIGURE 7
Example of a U-Battery core configuration [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The design evolution of the U-Battery cores also suggests that further reduction of the reactor weight may be possible with a smaller reactor pressure vessel (RPV). Internal diameter of the RPV is set to 1.8 m considering internal diameter of commercial LWR spent fuel transportation flasks. As such, the same flask can possibly be used to transport the U-Battery around the world. At most six columns of the reactor core can fit inside the RPV as shown in Figure 8. Number of axial fuel blocks and radial reflector (graphite or beryllium) blocks are two key considerations for the U-Battery design. If the reactor core height is limited to 4 m as in the commercial LWR, there shall be at most four axial fuel blocks in the core.7 Though theoretically possible, it was not however clear whether thorium is to be loaded in the smaller U-Battery core. Nevertheless, the smaller the core size, the higher the neutron leakage is. Therefore, it is practically safe to assume that there is a need for design optimization of the once-through U-Battery thorium core.
FIGURE 8
U-Battery reactor core configuration. The diameter of the RPV is set at 1.8 m [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
5 DUPLEX FUEL DESIGN FOR HTR
5.1 PWR duplex fuel pellet compared to HTR TRISO duplex fuel compact
It can be safely assumed that the SBU and WASB layouts in thorium-fueled HTR cores would have the same design issues as discussed previously, in which the cores require long irradiation period or multiple seed refueling to sufficiently breed 233U. The use of duplex fuel, along with other optimized design approaches, is thereby necessary. Although burnup characteristics of the ThO2-UO2 duplex pellet is limited by the safety requirement of LWR, its potential use in HTRs may have fewer similar issues related to fuel integrity under high-temperature conditions. HTR reactor, in contrast to LWR, is loaded with TRISO fuels which are relatively safer under high temperature environment as TRISO fuels are better able to maintain its integrity.77 HTR fuel was previously tested under both operational and accident conditions with successful irradiation up to approximately 3 times (10% fissions per initial metal atom [FIMA])88 and 5 times (16% FIMA) higher burnup than those of commercial PWR fuels.89
TRISO fuels are designed to endure high internal gas pressure without allowing fission material to break out and withstand temperatures up to 1600°C.65, 90, 91 This is actually one of the limiting operational issues for commercial PWR fuel rods. If fuel burnup exceeds 70 GWd/MTU and its temperature surpasses the threshold value of 1000°C ~ 1100°C, fission gas release and accumulation inside the fuel rods may be initiated and, thus, compromise the fuel integrity.92 It is worth noting that both UO2 and ThO2 TRISO fuel particles had been manufactured and tested since early 1980s, which indirectly demonstrate maturity of this fuel technology.68
Contrarily to the high TRISO fuel burnup capability, duplex fuel has been reported to have a higher cladding capture than UO2 fuel.93 The SiC cladding fuels have been proposed as they can achieve 1% higher discharge burnup compared to Zr. Note that SiC is used as a coating layer of TRISO particulate fuel, but SiC-based ceramics and their composites can also be used in high temperature reactors for core structural materials. The SiC's high-temperature strength shows better mechanical properties for pellet-cladding interactions at higher temperatures.94 The SiC composite cladding will offer a better neutron economy through a reduced neutron absorption cross-section and a higher burn-up compared to the current Zr alloys.93, 94
Adoption of duplex pellet design in HTR also does not require physical separation of the fuel compact, in which both UO2 and ThO2 can reside inside both inner and outer group of fuel kernels within the same fuel matrix. The most likely concept for the TRISO duplex fuel compact design is depicted in Figure 9, where UO2 seed particles filled the inner volume while ThO2 blanket particles filled the outer volume. Although the TRISO fuel is better than the PWR fuel pellet, the duplex concept could still cause higher fuel centerline temperatures from a single fuel rod point of view. The mere use of the seed-and-blanket will also cause the same problem where the fuel rod in the center of the core generates 100% of its energy during the BOC. This could unfortunately lead to high power peaking in the core. The use of duplex is part of the core layout optimisation strategy for the seed-and-blanket configuration and selection of neutron reflector designs or other heterogeneous layouts such as axial alternating fuel pellets. The energy distribution in the fuel or core installation will be more balanced if the duplex fuel replaces the blanket (distribution of 235U fissile mass spread across the blanket region). Thorium mass is, however, reduced and the conversion rate is not as good as the original seed-and-blanket configuration. With a more even power distribution, however, the power density (and flux) of the reactor can be increased and eventually increase the breeding of 233U. According to this method, a heterogeneous arrangement is still maintained which is better than the homogeneous Th-U mixture in terms of the conversion ratio.
FIGURE 9
The proposed conceptual design of the duplex TRISO fuel compact [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
5.2 Neutronics design consideration
There are two main considerations for optimal neutronic performance in a long-cycle micro-sized thorium-fueled HTR loaded with TRISO duplex fuel compacts: (a) seed-and-blanket fuel compositions, and (b) separation level of the thorium and uranium - fuel compact, block or/and core levels. Analysis to determine optimal loading patterns of the fuel channel (or fuel rod), block and core configuration may include combination of these complicated reactor parameters. ThO2-UO2 separation level for HTR is shown in Figure 10, which clearly shows the four categories of separation25: (a) no micro-scale separation within (Th,U)O2 mixture in the fuel kernel, (b) micro-scale separation with two different TRISO particles (either of thorium or uranium kernels) embedded inside the fuel compact matrix, (c) macro-scale separation of thorium and uranium fuel channels in the same fuel block, and (d) macro-scale separation of the fuel block, in which each fuel block is comprised of either UO2 or ThO2 fuel channels. These separation techniques can be adapted for the duplex pellet utilization - by simply loading duplex pellets in place of ThO2 or UO2 fuel compacts. Figure 11 shows prospective ThO2-UO2 separation schemes for the duplex pellet adoption inside the MMR-HTR prismatic block configurations.
FIGURE 10
Th-U separation schemes for the HTR prismatic block designs [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 11
Prospective Th-U separation schemes for duplex fuel compact inside MMR-HTR prismatic block designs [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Some important features in Figures 10 and 11 are the homogeneous, heterogeneous, seed-and-blanket and duplex with seed-and-blanket configurations. As mentioned earlier, ideally, the seed-and-blanket method is best for breeding. However, due to the high power peak within the core seed region, the power level should be lowered, resulting in inefficient breeding and a slow accumulation of 233U. If homogeneous Th-U fuel is used, the power density in the core will be evenly distributed, but 233U breeding rate will also remain slow because of the competing absorption of neutrons between uranium and thorium. A combination of duplex and seed-and-blanket method which replaces the thorium rods with duplex rods could optimize the core design. The combination allows lower power peak than the seed-and-blanket method, and higher conversion ratio than the homogeneous Th-U core.
As in other design process, the first step is still to determine detailed designs of the duplex pellet, such as its thickness, volumetric ratios of seed to blanket layers, seed enrichment, etc. Furthermore, Th-U separation schemes must also be adjudged based on the desired neutronic characteristics such as spatial distribution of neutron fluxes and neutron energy spectrum. It is important to stress that the main factor affecting the core burnup performance is its neutron spectral shift between the seed and blanket regions. Mutual resonance shielding of uranium and thorium is also a factor, though of smaller impact than that of the change in neutron spectrum.14 As such, it is a matter of due diligence in choosing the optimal strategy that effectively softens neutron spectrum in the blanket zone so that fissile materials are sufficiently bred in the core.95
In addition to the Th-U spatial separation analysis, considerations for other design specifications of the thorium-fueled HTR reactors such as power density, fuel life and carbon-to-thorium (C/Th) ratio are also equally important. Such variables contribute greatly to three core neutronic characteristics, which are (a) an increase in C/Th ratio results in a smaller amount of the required uranium seed, (b) a lower power density enables an extended fuel lifetime, and (c) number of fuels can be reduced if power density is increased provided the fuel lifetime and C/Th ratio are fixed.16 The C/Th ratio also has an important influence on the thorium core neutron moderation. It is thereby necessary to strategically balance certain fuel behaviors at BOC against those at the end of the core (EOC) in order to ensure optimal moderation spectrum for an extended core life with minimal burnup reactivity swing. At BOC, a high neutron capture rate is desirable in the fertile blanket zone to greatly suppress initial core reactivity and also to enhance fissile breeding. On the other hand, near EOC, it is more desirable to drastically reduce fertile capture to prevent unnecessary suppression of core excess reactivity to maintain its criticality.11
The use of duplex fuel should be consistent with certain design limits as well as the main parameters for the micro-sized HTR, one of which is the power density. A micro-sized HTR like the U-Battery has the power density around 3 MW/m3, which is one third of the larger reactor version85, that is, the GT-MHR. The GT-MHR has 6.6 MW/m3 power density with 1.6 kW/ft linear heat rate.96 It should always be noted that the maximum fast neutron fluence of around 8.0E+21 n/cm2 and peak fuel temperature of around 1350°C have been set as the HTR design limit.16
5.3 Design tools
Solving neutron transport equations for HTR models is very complicated as the problem deals with fuel's double heterogeneity (ie, TRISO heterogeneous arrangement in a compact fuel and heterogeneous rod arrangement in a fuel block). In the case of solving with deterministic codes, simplifications are necessary to reduce the level of spatial heterogeneity. In the case of solving with Monte Carlo codes, detailed modelling of the complex reactor geometries may be possible at the expense of computing power and time.67 Thereby, it is suggested that the burnup calculations to be performed using advanced 3-D Monte Carlo codes to capture the fine heterogeneity of TRISO duplex fuel pellets. Any simplification and homogenization of the graphite matrix and fuel kernels may lead to unaccounted yet significant calculation errors especially in the tailing of core isotopic compositions, effective multiplication factor (keff) and cycle length.97-99 To our advantage, systematic fuel particle modelling at the fuel rod level can help to expedite burnup simulations of the HTR systems, such as reduction of estimated CR value for the more advanced TRISO particle configuration compared to the homogenized or simplified arrangement.67 However, the memory requirement and the long simulation time/required CPU power are common capacity issues of Monte Carlo codes for depletion simulation.100 Consequently, a double heterogeneous HTR whole core calculation would probably require equivalence models with a predefined burnup zoning strategy.100, 101
Monte Carlo code such as the Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport (MCNP) is widely accepted as one of the advanced 3D neutronic design tools to simulate complicated reactor cores. The MCNP code, in fact, had been used to model and simulate the simplified HTR core.99, 102-104 The code can even randomly arrange TRISO particles in the HTR fuel compact. In comparison to simplified deterministic neutronic calculation, the 3D Monte Carlo code offers reliable detailed core analyses such as keff differences between regular cubic and stochastic TRISO particle arrangement at various particle packing fractions67, 97, 99, as shown in Figure 12.
FIGURE 12
Detailed Monte Carlo models of A, regular cubic, and B, stochastic TRISO particle arrangement98
6 SUMMARY
With demonstrated inherent safety and vital irradiation advantage over those of the commercial LWR, HTR claims relevancy as a practical candidate for a Gen-IV reactor designs. This is especially so since previous studies confirmed that the HTR technologies may also be compatible with thorium fuels. While heterogeneous seed-and-blanket configuration has previously been studied for a thorium-loaded HTR core designs, some technical challenges remain unsolved especially on how to extend thorium fuel burnup and its conversion ratio in a once-through micro-sized core cycle. A number of core specifications were considered, such as fuel seed composition, reflector selection and optimal heterogeneous configuration, to further extend the blanket burnup. This includes the pursuit of duplex Th-U fuel pellet in the MMR-HTR designs. The use of duplex pellet designs demonstrated by previous work for PWR (combined with axial pellet arrangement and checkboard rod configuration) shows a 15% increase in burnup. The conversion ratio for duplex fuel in the fast, epithermal or thermal ranges is 3%, 8% and 10% higher, respectively, compared to those of the conventional UO2 pellet, indicating a higher breeding capacity.
Nevertheless, the puzzle of balancing high burnup against high power peaking in the seed regions due to ThO2-UO2 physical separation in the HTR core remains to be answered. To complicate the investigation, this highly-sophisticated duplex thorium-fueled MMR-HTR core can only be reliably modeled using an advanced 3D Monte Carlo. As such, a comprehensive investigation on the proposed core using such detailed modeling to analyze the core neutronic characteristics and thereby determining technical merit of the proposed reactor design is necessary.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
A part of this work was supported by the Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia under Grant GUP-2018-113 and GP-2019-K018915. Mohamad Hairie Rabir also wishes to appreciate and acknowledges Public Service Department Malaysia (JPA) and Malaysia Nuclear Agency (MNA), for study fellowship.
