<title>Improving the recovery of Ba from Sr Resin columns using chelating agents</title>
<author>Samantha A. Labb; Ashley Sorcic; Yifen Tsai; Derek R. McLain</author>
<Affiliation>Colorado State University; Argonne National Laboratory</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-019-06664-w</DOI>
<URL>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-019-06664-w?utm_source=cnki&utm_medium=affiliate&utm_content=meta&utm_campaign=DDCN_1_GL01_metadata</URL>
Abstract
Age dating of Cs-137 sources requires the accurate and precise quantification of the isotope Ba-137. In previous efforts to determine the age of Cs-137 source material, variation in Ba recovery was the largest source of uncertainty. This work investigates the use of several common chelating agents (EDTA, CDTA, DTPA, and NTA) to strip barium from Sr Resin columns quantitatively in an effort to improve the reproducibility of the separation. Batch studies showed conditions in which CDTA, EDTA, and NTA may suppress the retention of Ba on the column. Follow-up column studies showed excellent removal of barium from the column with quantitative recovery in the appropriate elution fraction. This work builds upon previous studies and establishes additional chelating agents that could be used in an age dating separation procedure.
Introduction
The fission product Cs-137 is used in a variety of commercial and medical applications in the form of sealed radioactive sources. These sources are commonly used in self-contained irradiators, radiotherapy units, density gauges, well-logging devices, and as calibration sources [1]. It finds utility in many of these applications due to its favorable half-life (30.07 years) and gamma emission energy (661.7 keV). Unfortunately, these same characteristics also make it attractive for use in a radiological dispersal device (RDD), or “dirty bomb”.
Current events have driven a concerted effort to develop methods that can be used to identify the source of Cs-137 if the material is found outside of regulatory control. Because different source manufacturers have produced Cs-137 at different times through the years, the age of any interdicted material can help narrow down its point of origin. The “age” of a Cs-137 source, corresponding to its last purification date, can be determined using the ratio of Cs-137 to its daughter, Ba-137, using the following equation:
t=ln(1+ND(t)NP(t))×1λ
where t is the elapsed time since purification, ND (t) is the atom amount of the daughter nuclide at present time, NP (t) is the atom amount of parent nuclide at present time, and λ is the decay constant of the parent nuclide. Although gamma spectrometry can quantify Cs-137, Ba-137 is stable and therefore mass spectrometry is required to quantify Ba-137. Unfortunately, Cs-137 causes isobaric interference on Ba-137 mass spectrometric measurements and the two must therefore be separated prior to barium analysis.
Previous work by Sommers et al. [2] and Steeb et al. [3] used extraction chromatography with Sr Resin to separate the parent and daughter with success. A subsequent attempt by Steeb et al. [4] to apply the same procedure to a cesium ceramic matrix determined that the largest source of uncertainty in the procedure was the recovery of Ba from the column. The variability in Ba recovery accounted for 85% of the variability in the determined age, which was ≤ 3% (k = 2) with respect to Cs (pure Ba recovery numbers were not reported). This corresponds to ± 2 years for a 60 year old source. In order to improve Ba recovery, Steeb et al. added the chelating agent ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) to the elution matrix to effectively back-extract the Ba into the aqueous phase, similarly to previous anion exchange procedures [4,5,6]. Doing this improved recovery and repeatability, thereby decreasing the uncertainty in the associated age calculations to ≤ 1.7% (k = 2) [4]. Subsequently, Surrao [7] investigated the use of EDTA and diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) and found that adjustment to pH 9 further increased the Ba recovery and reproducibility. In that work, Ba recoveries of 100.9 ± 2.2% were achieved. This work expands the suite of chelating agents examined and takes a closer look at the effects of pH on Ba recovery.
Experimental
Materials
Samples and standards for the separation improvement experiments were prepared using ultra-high purity solvents and reagents to avoid unintentional contamination. A variety of solutions were prepared by dissolving solid KNO3, NaNO3, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), cyclohexyldiaminetetraacetic acid (CDTA), diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA), or nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) in de-ionized water as elution reagents. Potassium and sodium nitrate salts were Puratronic grade, obtained from Alfa Aesar (Haverhill, MA), while EDTA, NTA, and CDTA were 99%, obtained from Acros Organics (New Jersey, NJ), and DTPA was ≥ 99.0%, obtained from Fluka (Morris Plains, NJ). After dissolution of the solids, the pH was adjusted by adding solid NaOH (TraceSELECT, Fluka) until the desired level was reached, after which the solutions were diluted to 50 ml. Standards and spike solutions were prepared using certified natural elemental standards of Ba (998 ± 5 µg/ml; density = 1.000 g/ml @ 20 °C) and In (997 ± 3 µg/ml; density = 1.011 g/ml @ 20 °C) from Inorganic Ventures (Christiansburg, VA). By using the certified density of each elemental standard, it was possible to determine the concentrations in terms of µg/g. Doing so allowed for the use of mass-based measurements and calculations to minimize error. All solutions were prepared with deionized water (DIW) from a Thermo Scientific™ Barnstead™ MicroPure™ water purification system.
The Sr Resin used in both batch and column studies contains 1.0 M 4,4′(5′)-di-t-butylcyclohexano 18-crown-6 in 1-octanol as the extractant, and was manufactured by Eichrom Technologies (Lisle, IL). All batch and column studies were carried out using their 50–100 µm particle size resin. All resin products were used as received from the manufacturer.
Procedure
Both batch studies and column studies were employed to optimize the chelating agent back-extraction conditions.
Batch studies
Batch studies were carried out as described by McLain et al. [8,9,10] Briefly, Sr Resin was weighed into 2 ml centrifuge tubes and preconditioned with chelating agent solution for 1 h, then spiked with Ba solution and mixed for an additional hour to ensure equilibration. At this point, the aqueous phase was separated from the resin using a 0.45 µm PTFE syringe filter and an aliquot of the aqueous phase was prepared for ICP-MS analysis. Results are displayed as k′ values, which indicate the number of free column volumes (FCVs) required to reach the peak maximum of the elution profile when eluting from a chromatography column. Mathematical operations to transform batch concentration data to k′ can be found in Chiarizia et al. [11].
Initially, chelating agent solutions were prepared by adjusting DIW to the desired pH, then dissolving the chelating agent. It was discovered, however, that the chelating agents were buffering the solutions to much different pH levels, especially when present in high concentrations. The preparation procedure was therefore switched to adding the chelating agents to 30–40 ml DIW, then adding solid NaOH until the pH stabilized at the desired level, and finally diluting to 50 ml. The most concentrated solutions were prepared first, and all subsequent batch study solutions were prepared via serial dilution from these. Batch studies were carried out at pH 7, 9, and 11 with varying concentrations of all four chelating agents. Batch studies were also performed with varying concentrations of NaNO3 and KNO3 without pH adjustment to test the hypothesis laid out by Surrao et al. [7] that Na+ and K+ could effectively compete with the Ba2+ enough to improve Ba recovery. Concentrations of the salts analyzed were 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, and 1 M. Finally, batch studies were carried out at pH 7.6, 8.7, and 10.8 (adjusted with NaOH) without any chelating agent added. A summary of the batch studies carried out in this work is found in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of all batch studies carried out as part of this work
Full size table
Column studies
Column studies were performed using 1-ml polypropylene Bio-Scale™ Mini Cartridges (Bio-Rad Laboratories) made of polypropylene with a height of 38 mm and an inner diameter of 6 mm, and were slurry packed with Sr Resin in DIW. Each column was slurry packed by mixing an amount of resin with DIW, adding a portion to the column, pulling the solution through the column with a peristaltic pump until the liquid level in the column was just higher than the resin, and then repeating the process until the entire 1-ml column was filled with resin. Once packed, the column was closed and all separations were run with solution pumped in the reverse direction. All separations were run at room temperature at a flow rate of 0.5 ml min−1. In order to compare the recoveries achieved for the different chelating agents, three column studies were performed using 0.05 M solutions of NTA, DTPA, and CDTA at pH 9. These conditions were selected based on the results of the batch studies. An additional separation was performed using 0.05 M HNO3 to establish a baseline using conditions recommended by the manufacturer. The EDTA system was omitted, as it was thoroughly investigated previously [4, 7].
Column studies were carried out as described by Steeb et al. [4] Briefly, each column was conditioned with 5 ml of 3 M HNO3 at a flow rate of 1 ml min−1. The column was loaded with 0.5 ml of 500 ppb Ba solution in 3 M HNO3, and then was rinsed with 3 ml of the same solution used to condition the column. In a real separation, the rinse fractions would contain any Cs that was initially in solution with the Ba. Previously published literature indicates all Cs would be eluted from the column in the first 1–4 free column volumes (0.6–2.4 ml) [2, 4, 12, 13]. Following this, a 0.5 ml plug of DIW was added to the column to prevent any chelating agent precipitation, and finally 5.5 ml of chelating agent solution was used to remove Ba from the column. Once the recovery was determined, high-fidelity measurements of the top two performers were carried out. For these trials, three columns were packed for each chelating agent, and only two fractions (rinse and Ba elution) were collected for each.
For all column studies, fractions were collected in labeled 10 ml PTFE beakers containing 250 ng of In as an internal standard. Following collection, 1 ml of 3 M HNO3 was added to each fraction and refluxed for 1 h at 135 °C to destroy as much of the organic content as possible, then evaporated to dryness. This was repeated, and then the residues were reconstituted in 2% HNO3, transferred to a sterile 50 ml centrifuge tube, diluted to 25 g using 2% HNO3, and sent for ICP-MS analysis. In order to monitor recovery, “spike” samples were prepared using the same solution that was loaded on the column. In order to account for Ba found in the reagents, blanks were prepared by processing samples of the reagents in the same manner as the rest of the samples.
Measurements
Elemental concentrations of In and Ba in each collected fraction were measured with a NexION 2000 Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) (PerkinElmer, Shelton, CT). This system was equipped with a PerkinElmer S-10 autosampler and a discrete dynode electron multiplier detector. A PFA Barrel spray chamber and a Type C PFA ST3 nebulizer form the sample introduction-system. All ICP-MS samples and calibration standards were prepared by mass and ratio-based data reduction and calibration formulas were employed to reduce systematic error, as recommended by Salit et al. [14,15,16].
The samples were analyzed in the pulse-counting mode with a dead-time correction of 62 ns. The following parameters were utilized for each analysis run: a 100-ms dwell time, 15 sweeps per replicate, and 5 replicates per sample. All data were acquired in the quantitative analysis mode and were divided by the measured in intensity to account for instrument noise and drift. Based on the standard deviation of the analyzed samples, minimum and maximum k′ values able to be determined were 0.13 and 12,500, respectively.
Results and discussion
Batch studies
Results of the different batch studies were somewhat predictable in that under all conditions an increase in chelating agent concentration resulted in a lower k′ value. This is demonstrated at pH 7, pH 9, and pH 11 in Figs. 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Interestingly, increasing pH did not uniformly improve the performance of the chelating agents. NTA and EDTA perform much better at pH 9 and pH 11 than at pH 7. CDTA has a similar performance in each matrix, with a mildly better performance at pH 7. In contrast, it appears that DTPA performs effectively the same at pH 7 and pH 11, with a marginal increase in k′ at pH 9. This variety of performance characteristics is likely due to the different levels of deprotonation for the various chelating agents. For comparison, the various pKa values have been compiled in Table 2, along with the stability constants of the chelating agents with Ba [17,18,19,20,21]. Both EDTA and NTA have a significant concentration of completely deprotonated molecules by pH 8, while DTPA only achieves similar levels at pH 9 and CDTA at pH 10. The variety of deprotonation constants also made it difficult to adjust the pH of solutions exactly. As a result, all pH levels are approximate (± 0.5 of what is cited). It is possible that this also had some effect on the observed retention of Ba.
Fig. 1
figure1
Batch study results for the various chelating agent concentrations when adjusted to pH 7 with NaOH. Error bars are 1σ
Fig. 2
figure2
Batch study results for the various chelating agent concentrations when adjusted to pH 9 with NaOH. Error bars are 1σ
Fig. 3
figure3
Batch study results for the various chelating agents concentrations when adjusted to pH 11 with NaOH. Error bars are 1σ
Table 2 The various pKa values for the selected chelating agents, along with the stability constant of each with Ba [17,18,19,20,21]
At the highest concentrations of chelating agent, it was observed that material would precipitate out of solution over time after solutions were separated from the resin and prepared for ICP-MS analysis. This is likely due to the chelating agents being exposed to acid solutions, in which they are only sparingly soluble. This precipitation was only observed when the solutions were being disposed of, however, so it is not believed that it had any impact on the analysis.
In any event, EDTA and NTA exhibit their best performance (lowest Ba k′) at pH 9 while DTPA and CDTA exhibit their best performance at pH 7. The overall best performance for all chelators and pH values tested was for EDTA at pH 9.
A batch study was also performed where the solutions were adjusted to pH 7.6, 8.7, and 10.8 but no chelating agent was added. Interestingly, the retention was extremely low for all of these systems, indicating that it may be possible to elute the Ba under slightly basic (7 ≤ pH ≤ 11) conditions (see Fig. 4). Though Ba(HO)2 is generally considered “slightly soluble”, with a Ksp of 2.55 × 10−4 even 10 µg of Ba will be completely miscible at all three pH levels investigated [22].
Fig. 4
figure4
Batch study results when solution is adjusted to a given pH with NaOH, but no chelating agent is added. Error bars are 1σ
Finally, batch studies were conducted with varying amounts of NaNO3 and KNO3 added to the systems to test the hypothesis laid out by Surrao [7]. Namely, that the Na+ and K+ cations would compete with Ba2+ on the resin enough to increase Ba recovery. The results of these batch studies are found in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5
figure5
Batch study results when competing salt solutions of NaNO3 and KNO3 are added. Error bars are 1σ
While it appears that the retention of Ba increases as Na and K are added to the system, it is possible this is from the additional nitrate that was also added. As free nitrate is added, the probability of Ba combining to make the neutral Ba(NO3)2 species increases, which correspondingly increases the probability of Ba being extracted since the resin has been shown to extract the neutral alkali earth metals [23]. It should also be noted that both sodium and potassium nitrate salts were tested at 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, and 1 M concentrations. Points that are missing from Fig. 5 were below the limit of detection (k′ = 0.13). It is suspected that the reason for this is not that the Ba is being extracted so little, but that there is a significant amount of Ba present in the KNO3 used in the study, even though it was a high-purity reagent (99.997% metals basis). Because the increase in k′ over the course of the study was somewhat smaller for the potassium salt than the sodium salt, indicating some possible competition, this system was also included in the set of high-fidelity column studies.
Based on the batch studies performed, additional experiments with CDTA, DTPA, and NTA at 0.05 M. This concentration was identified as optimal in that it minimized the retention of Ba on the column without eventually resulting in precipitation of the chelating agents in the samples that were acidified for analysis. Though DTPA worked better at pH 11, the solubility limit of Ba drops quickly starting at pH 11 (dropping 2 orders of magnitude for every pH integer). For this reason, all chelating agents were studied at pH 9 moving forward.
Column studies
Scoping study
Each of the systems identified as “optimal” were tested with the chelating agent at 0.05 M to help combat the possibility of chelator precipitation on the column during operation. Unfortunately, the pH 7 systems of DTPA and CDTA still had issues with precipitation. Because of this, these systems were also tested at pH 9. Small amounts of Ba were detected in the load/rinse fractions, and recoveries were above 80% for all columns (see Fig. 6). The columns eluted with NTA and CDTA had the best recoveries, though CDTA had nearly 2% of the Ba come out in the rinse fraction. Elution profiles from the four scoping study columns can be seen in Fig. 7. All of the elution matrices resulted in a peak maximum between 5.3 and 5.7 g.
Fig. 6
figure6
Barium recovery using various elution matrices. NTA, CDTA, and DTPA solutions were adjusted to pH 9, all using NaOH
Fig. 7
figure7
Elution profiles of barium from scoping study
High fidelity measurements
Following the results of the initial scoping study, high fidelity measurements were made using NTA, CDTA, and KNO3 as elution matrices. NTA and CDTA were chosen because of the excellent recovery seen in the scoping study, and KNO3 was chosen because of the favorable competition shown in the batch studies. The consistency seen in the elution peak location made it likely that the KNO3 elution point would also be in the 5.3–5.7 g elution range, and as a result, the volumes of eluent were not changed at all.
The results of the high-fidelity measurements are found in Table 3, below. Notably, the recovery of Ba using the K+ competing cation showed much lower recovery than the chelating agents. It is possible that this was partially due to not adjusting the pH of the KNO3 solution prior to its use as an elution matrix. However, even if it were adjusted and the recovery improved, it is unlikely that the uncertainty of the recovery would be reduced any further. This is because, even though high purity KNO3 was used, a significant amount of Ba still had to be subtracted from each elution fraction.
Table 3 Results from the high-fidelity tests
In contrast to the KNO3 trials, the NTA and CDTA columns had negligible amounts of Ba contamination that needed to be compensated for. The recoveries associated with both of the chelating agents is within 2σ of 100%, indicating quantitative recovery. The uncertainties associated with the data presented here are slightly larger than those achieved by Surrao et al. [7] with EDTA (100.9 ± 2.2%). This indicates that the two chelating agents should be viable alternatives to EDTA for removing Ba from Sr Resin columns. This is evidenced further by the two-fold improvement in uncertainty when compared to the KNO3 data, and in the uncertainties being less than those observed for elution with 0.05 M HNO3 in the earlier scoping study (90 ± 4%).
Conclusions
The batch studies carried out in this work show that Ba retention on Sr Resin decreases with increasing concentrations of all the chelating agents tested. The results of the batch studies show that EDTA and NTA exhibit their best Ba retention reduction at pH 9, while DTPA and CDTA exhibit their best at pH 7. Increasing pH alone also decreases Ba retention, though barium’s relatively low solubility in high-pH systems decreases the attractiveness of such an elution matrix. It was also shown that Ba retention increased from k′ = min (0.13) to k′ = 1–2 with the addition of sodium and potassium nitrate salts, though this is likely due to the addition of nitrate to the system. When compared with the retention of Ba in nitric acid at the corresponding concentrations, the retention is an order of magnitude lower, indicating at least some competition [24].
The column chromatography experiments carried out indicate that the addition of a competing cation like K+ is not an effective means of improving Ba recovery from Sr Resin. They do show, however, that the chelating agents CDTA and NTA are viable alternative options to EDTA that improve both recovery and repeatability of Ba separations. The addition of these tools to the nuclear forensic examiner’s selection improve the likelihood of an accurate age determination. Subsequently, it will be possible to make a better estimation of where illicit radiological materials may have come from.
