<title>Performance evaluation of YAlO3 scintillator plates with different Ce concentrations</title>
<author>Nakanishi Kohei; Yamamoto Seiichi; Kamada Kei; Yoshikawa Akira</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Integrated Health Science, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan; New Industry Creation Hatchery Center (NICHe), Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan; Department of Radiology, Akita Hospital, Chiryu, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Applied Radiation and Isotopes</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.apradiso.2020.109483</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0969804320306266?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•The light output of a YAP(Ce) significantly increased with the Ce concentrations, and the decay time of the YAP(Ce) decreased with the Ce concentrations.
•YAP(Ce) plate with a concentration of 2% Ce is the best selection for the development of radiation detectors or radiation imaging detectors.
•The YAP(Ce) plate with a 2% Ce had the highest light output and the best energy resolution as well as the shortest decay time.
Abstract
Since Ce-doped YAlO3 (YAP(Ce)) scintillators have small non-proportionality, it is useful to develop a radiation imaging detector for low-energy gamma photons or X-rays. However, the YAP(Ce) performance with different Ce concentrations remains unclear. Consequently, we measured the basic performance of YAP(Ce) plates with different Ce concentrations. We used three types of YAP(Ce) scintillator plates with different Ce concentrations: 0.05% Ce, 1% Ce, and 2% Ce. The YAP(Ce) plates were 10 mm × 10 mm x 0.5 mm. We measured and compared the energy spectra, the decay times, the α-γ ratio, and the non-proportionality. We also evaluated the relation between these performances and the Ce concentrations. The light output of a YAP(Ce) showed positive correlation with the Ce concentrations, and the decay time of the YAP(Ce) showed a negative correlation with them. The energy resolution slightly improved for a YAP(Ce) with higher Ce concentrations. We found the α-γ ratio were slightly larger for higher Ce concentrations. The YAP(Ce) plate with a 2% Ce had the highest light output and the best energy resolution as well as the shortest decay time. Based on these results, the YAP(Ce) plate with a concentration of 2% Ce is a better selection for the development of radiation detectors or radiation imaging detectors for low-energy gamma photons or X-rays as well as alpha particles.
Keywords
YAP(Ce);Ce concentration;Energy spectra;Decay times;α-γ ratio;Non-proportionality
1. Introduction
Since many scintillators have been developed recently, each of which has its own unique physical properties, selecting a proper scintillator is critical for such purposes as the development of radiation imaging detectors. To improve such performances as the spatial resolution of a radiation imaging detector, the scintillator's light output is important because the energy and spatial resolutions of scintillation cameras are inversely proportional to the square root of the scintillator's light output (Tanaka et al., 1970; Kamada et al., 2017). Therefore a scintillator with a high light output such as NaI(Tl) or GAGG(Ce) is used to develop high resolution radiation imaging detectors (Ando et al., 2017; Yamamoto et al., 2011a, Yamamoto et al., 2013, Yamamoto et al., 2019a, Yamamoto et al., 2019c). However, for most scintillators, the light output per MeV decreases as the energy of the gamma photons or the X-rays is decreased. This effect is referred to as the “non-proportionality” of scintillators (Moses et al., 2012). Due to it, the high resolution imaging of low-energy gamma photons or X-rays is sometimes difficult (Kapusta et al., 1999) because the light output/MeV decreases as the energy of gamma photons or X-rays is decreased, and event-to-event fluctuation of light yield is increased.
A Ce-doped YAlO3 (YAP(Ce)) is a scintillator with small non-proportionality (Kapusta et al., 1999). A radiation imaging detector using a YAP(Ce) plate showed excellent spatial resolution for low-energy gamma photons or X-rays as well as alpha particles (Yamamoto et al., 2018). YAP(Ce) is also sometimes used for various radiation detectors for single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET), although the density is not so high (5.35) (Guerra and Belcari, 2007; Guerra et al., 1998, 2006; Vilardi et al., 2006; Kapusta et al., 1998). A YAP (Ce)-based radiation imaging detector was also used for the imaging of secondary electron bremsstrahlung X-rays emitted during carbon-ion irradiation and high resolution images were acquired (Yamamoto et al., 2019b). In addition, YAP(Ce) is promising for autoradiography of alpha-particle emitter for radionuclide therapy because of high spatial resolution. However, the alpha-particle emitters emit also gamma photons or X-rays, so the α-γ ratio of YAP(Ce) is primary concern to evaluate ability of YAP(Ce) for discrimination for alpha particle and gamma photons or X-rays.
The properties of such Ce-doped scintillators as LSO(Ce), GSO(Ce), and YAG(Ce) are dependent on Ce concentrations (van Loef et al., 2002; Yanagida et al., 2005; Okumura et al., 2015; Feng et al., 2011; Fukabori et al., 2011; Kapusta et al., 2000). Correlation of properties of YAP(Ce) with Ce concentration was also evaluated with different size samples grown by various methods (B Donnald et al., 2018). There are some other papers on YAP(Ce) published previously (Mengesha et al., 1998; Mareset al, 2003; Yamamoto et al., 2019c). In this study, we measured the light output, the energy resolution, the non-proportionality, the α-γ ratios, and the decay times of YAP(Ce) plates of identical sizes with different Ce concentrations which were grown by same method and evaluated the relation between these performances.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Scintillators for evaluations
For an evaluation of the basic YAP(Ce) performances with different Ce concentrations, we used three types of YAP(Ce) plates with different Ce concentrations: 0.05% Ce, 1% Ce, and 2% Ce. All of the YAP(Ce) plates were 10 mm × 10 mm × 0.5 mm with the surface condition was rough. The YAP(Ce) plates were made by Tohoku University by the edge-defined film-fed growth (EFG) method. Fig. 1 shows the YAP plates with different Ce concentrations. The YAP(Ce) plate with higher Ce concentration looked opaque since optical photo was scattered by Rayleigh scattering in the YAP(Ce) plate.
Fig. 1. Photo of YAP plates with different Ce concentrations: 0.05% Ce (left), 1% Ce (center), and 2% Ce (right).
2.2. Measurements of energy spectra
We measured the energy spectra of the YAP(Ce) plates to evaluate the light output, the energy resolution, the α-γ ratios, and the non-proportionality. Each YAP(Ce) was placed on the center of a 3-inch round, high quantum efficiency PMT (Hamamatsu Photonics, R6233-100HA) with mechanical compression. The scintillator was covered with Al Mylar as a reflector. The experimental setup to measure the energy spectra is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Schematic drawing of experimental setup to measure energy spectra of alpha particles (A), gamma photons from Cs-137 and Co-57 (B), and gamma photons from Am-241 (C).
We irradiated the YAP(Ce) plate with alpha particles from Am-241 (5.5 MeV) (Fig. 2(A)), gamma photons or X-rays from Cs-137 (662 keV and 32–35 keV) (Fig. 2(B)), Co-57 (122 keV) (Fig. 2(B)), and gamma photons from Am-241 (60 keV) (Fig. 2 (C)). The activities of Am-241, Cs-137 and Co-57 were 2 kBq, 300 kBq and 2.1 kBq. Signals from the PMT were amplified by a standard NIM module and fed to a multi-channel analyzer (MCA) (Clear Pulse, 1125, Japan).
The light output was evaluated by the peak channels of the energy spectra. We conducted Gaussian fitting using MCA software and calculated the energy resolution. We calculated the α-γ ratios from the peak channel of the energy spectra measured with 5.5-MeV alpha particles and 662-keV gamma photons. The α-γ ratio is the ratio of the light output for α-particle per MeV and that of γ photons per MeV.
With the values of the photo-peak channel in the energy spectra, we calculated the non-proportionality, which is the ratio of the photo-peak channel for each gamma photon or X-ray per MeV to the photo-peak channel for the gamma photons of 662 keV per MeV.
2.3. Measurements of decay times
We measured the pulse shapes for estimating the decay times of the YAP (Ce) with different Ce concentrations. With a 2-inch diameter (R9779, Hamamatsu Photonics, Japan: transit time spread of 250 ps and rise time of 1.8 ns), we measured the pulse shapes for the gamma photons of Am-241 (60 keV) by feeding the signal to a digital oscilloscope (Yokogawa DLM 2052: maximum sampling rate of 500 MHz, 2.5 GS/s) (Yamamoto and Nitta, 2018; Yamamoto et al., 2011b). We plotted the data on a graph and conducted curve fitting with an exponential fitting function using commercial spread sheet software (Excel). The decay times were calculated from the fitting function of the curves in time intervals of 32–42 ns.
3. Results
3.1. Energy spectra
We show the energy spectrum for the alpha particles emitted from Am-241 in Fig. 3(A). The peak channels increased with a concentration of the Ce doped in YAP(Ce). Fig. 3(B) shows the energy spectrum measured with Am-241 photons. The photo-peaks of the 60-keV gamma photons and the 16-keV x-rays are clearly observed in the energy spectra.
Fig. 3. Energy spectra of YAP(Ce) for 5.5-MeV alpha particles (A) and 60-keV gamma photons (B).
We evaluated the correlations between Ce concentration and peak channels of the gamma photons and the alpha particles, and they are shown in Fig. 4(A). For both the gamma photons and the alpha particles, the peak channel increased as the Ce concentration increased. We also evaluated the correlations between Ce concentration and energy resolution for alpha particles and the gamma photons (Fig. 4(B)). For both, the energy resolution slightly improved as the Ce concentration increased. However, uncertainties of energy resolution for alpha particles were relatively large.
Fig. 4. Correlations between Ce concentration of YAP(Ce) and peak channel (A) and that between Ce concentration and energy resolution (B).
The α-γ ratios were summarized in Table 1. The α-γ ratios were slightly increased with the Ce concentration.
Table 1. α-γ ratios for YAP(Ce) plates with different Ce concentrations.
Ce concentration	0.05	1	2
α-γ ratio	0.207 ± 0.023	0.222 ± 0.002	0.249 ± 0.003
The non-proportionalities (the relative photo-peak channels) for the YAPs with 2% Ce, 1% Ce, and 0.05% Ce are shown in Fig. 5. The non-proportionality of the YAP(Ce) with 2% Ce was slightly larger than other two Ce concentrations.
Fig. 5. Non-proportionalities for YAP(Ce) with 2% Ce, 1% Ce, and 0.05% Ce.
3.2. Decay times
We show the pulse shapes of the YAP(Ce) plates with different Ce concentrations for the gamma photons in Fig. 6. The decay time was shortest for a YAP(Ce) with 2% Ce.
Fig. 6. Decay curves of YAP(Ce) plates with different Ce concentrations or 60-keV gamma photons.
Fig. 7 shows a scattered plot of the decay times versus the Ce concentrations. The decay time was shortened with increasing Ce concentration.
Fig. 7. Decay times of YAP(Ce) plates with different Ce concentrations as function of Ce concentrations.
4. Discussion
We measured the YAP(Ce) performance with different Ce concentrations and evaluated the relation between the performance and Ce concentrations. The light output of a YAP(Ce) showed a positive correlation with the Ce concentrations, and the energy resolution was slightly improved with higher Ce concentrations. The decay time of YAP(Ce) showed a negative correlation. These results indicate that YAP(Ce) with a concentration of 2% Ce is a better selection within our samples for the development of radiation detectors or radiation imaging detectors because of its high light output, short decay time, and better energy resolution.
The transparency of the YAP(Ce) with higher Ce concentrations looked smaller as shown in Fig. 1. Low transparency of scintillator may affect the reduction of light output or lower energy resolution. However the measured results showed the YAP(Ce) with higher Ce concentrations showed higher light output and higher energy resolution as shown in Fig. 4. The reason was probably because of the thin thickness of the YAP(Ce) used for the experiments (0.5 mm thick). However the low transparency of scintillator will be a problem for a thicker YAP(Ce) because the attenuation of light will be larger.
We found the α-γ ratios of YAP(Ce) slightly increased with the Ce concentrations and there was slight negative relation between proportionality and Ce concentration. However YAP(Ce)'s superior proportionality over the other scintillators is its advantage and it became clear that YAP(Ce) with up to 2% Ce concentrations had the advantage although the proportionality and transparency were slightly decreased.
The decay time shortened as the Ce concentration increased. A YAP(Ce) with a high Ce concentration may be useful for detectors or imaging detectors that need such fast responses as PET systems. YAP(Ce) is sometimes used for high resolution small animal PET systems (Guerra et al., 1998, 2006; Vilardi et al., 2006; Kapusta et al., 1998). With such systems or small diameter brain PET systems (Yamamoto et al., 2011b; Nakanishi et al., 2019), a short decay time is an advantage for improving timing properties and high count rate capability (Nakanishi et al., 2019).
The decay times shown in Fig. 7 were slightly longer than those reported by other groups (Moszyński et al., 1998; Moretti et al., 2017). One possible reason of our relatively slow decay times compared with other groups was the different methods of the decay time measurements. We used digital oscilloscope combined with a PMT (R9779) for the evaluation of the decay times. Our method might produce longer decay times because of the capacitance between PMT and digital oscilloscope. While other group used single photon counting method that is a kind of gold standard for absolute decay time measurements (Moszyński et al., 1998; Moretti et al., 2017).
Another possible reason of our relatively slow decay times compared with other groups was the different manufacturing method of the YAP(Ce) scintillators. With our EFG method, oxygen defects might be produced, then decay times became longer. However more investigations will be needed to clarify the reasons of the relatively longer decay times.
5. Conclusions
We measured and compared the basic performance of YAP(Ce) with different Ce concentrations. Its light output and decay time had a relation with the Ce concentrations, and the α-γ ratio slightly increased. The YAP(Ce) plate with a concentration of 2% Ce is a better selection for the development of radiation detectors or radiation imaging detectors for low-energy gamma photons or X-rays as well as alpha particles.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kohei Nakanishi: Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft. Seiichi Yamamoto: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing, Project administration. Kei Kamada: Resources, Supervision, Writing - review & editing. Akira Yoshikawa: Resources, Supervision, Writing - review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest associated with this manuscript titled “Performance evaluation of YAlO3 scintillator plates with different Ce concentrations”.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI 18K19909.