<title>The effect of oxidation-and-quenching process during a LOCA on the behavior of the oxidation and embrittlement of Zircaloy-4 cladding under reheating transients</title>
<author>Hideki Miwa; Masaki Amaya</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Safety Research Center , Japan Atomic Energy Agency , Ibaraki , Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2016.1198730</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00223131.2016.1198730?scroll=top&needAccess=true</URL>
ABSTRACT
Two-sided oxidation tests, ring compression tests and semi-integral quench tests on Zircaloy-4 cladding specimens were conducted under temperature transient conditions simulating a post-quench reheat transient in order to evaluate the effect of high-temperature oxidation and quenching during a loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) on the behavior of the oxidation and embrittlement of the cladding under a loss of long-term core-cooling condition. Test specimens prepared from non-irradiated Zircaloy-4 cladding tube were oxidized at a temperature between 1173 and 1473 K in steam flow and quenched by soaking the specimen in room temperature water. Re-heating tests were performed on the specimens in steam flow at a temperature between 1173 and 1473 K. The suppression of oxide layer growth and weight gain was observed under certain reheating-after-quenching conditions. Nevertheless, it seemed that the temperature transients including quenching-and-reheating process did not significantly affect the embrittlement of cladding. It was found that the embrittlement behavior of cladding during the temperature transients including quenching-and-reheating process could be dealt with on the basis of the Equivalent Cladding Reacted (ECR) based on the Baker–Just correlation.
KEYWORDS: Loss-of-coolant accident；Zircaloy-4；cladding；long-term core cooling；quench；reheating；steam；oxidation；fracture；ring compression test
1. Introduction
A loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) which would be caused by the failure of the coolant piping connected to a reactor pressure vessel is one of the design-basis accidents of light water reactors (LWRs). During the LOCA, fuel cladding reacts with steam at high temperature until it is quenched by the coolant injected by the emergency core cooling system (ECCS). Since the high-temperature oxidation promotes the embrittlement of fuel cladding, the amount of oxidation of cladding and the peak cladding temperature have been limited according to the ECCS acceptance criteria of LWRs. These criteria were determined so that fuel cladding can withstand the thermal shock occurring during the reflood phase of the LOCA.
The LOCA is followed by a long-term core cooling (LTCC) which removes the decay heat from the reactor core. Since the leakage of coolant water continues, continuous water injection is needed to keep the reactor core covered with water. In order to do this, the water supply mode is switched from ECCS injection to ECCS recirculation of the leaked water supplied from the suppression pool in the case of boiling water reactors (BWRs), or from the containment sump in the case of pressurized water reactors (PWRs). In the United States, the Pressurized Water Reactor Owners Group applies an LTCC acceptance criterion that the cladding temperature during recirculation from the containment sump will not exceed 800 °F [1]. This restrictive cladding temperature was selected based on the long-term autoclave testing results that neither significant additional corrosion nor hydrogen pickup that causes the degradation of the mechanical properties of cladding occurred by the exposure at a temperature of 800 °F and below [1].
In the case that a loss-of-LTCC accident occurs, the fuel rods in the reactor core would be exposed to high-temperature steam again and re-oxidation of cladding would occur. However, it has not been clearly understood how the high-temperature oxidation and water-quenching of cladding during a LOCA affect the re-oxidation behavior of cladding after the LOCA. Even if the cladding survived during the water-quenching after the high-temperature oxidation during the LOCA, thermal shock during the quenching process might affect the oxidation and embrittlement behavior of cladding after the LOCA. Moreover, temperature transients including the quenching-and-reheating process might affect the subsequent oxidation behavior of cladding.
Therefore, in the present study, the oxidation test, ring compression tests (RCTs) and semi-integral quench tests that can simulate the temperature transient during a quenching-and-reheating process were performed on non-irradiated Zircaloy-4 cladding in order to clarify the effect of high-temperature oxidation and quenching during a LOCA on the oxidation and embrittlement behavior of cladding under loss-of-LTCC conditions.
2. Experimental
2.1. Two-sided oxidation and quench test
Ring specimens with a length of 10 mm were prepared from a non-irradiated 17 × 17-type Zircaloy-4 cladding tube for a PWR. The outer and inner diameters of the specimens were 9.50 and 8.22 mm, respectively. Both ends of the specimens were open so that the outer and inner surfaces of the specimens were oxidized during the test (two-sided oxidation). In this test, the apparatus used was similar to that shown in [2], in which an infrared furnace was used. The specimen was placed in the quartz reaction tube, and heated by an infrared furnace in steam flow. The quenching process after high-temperature oxidation was simulated by flooding room temperature water from the bottom of the quartz reaction tube. The steam supply rate was maintained at (5 ± 1) mg/(cm2 s) throughout the test processes except for quenching process, which is large enough to prevent steam starvation conditions [3]. R-type thermocouples were spot-welded on the outer surface of the specimen in order to control and measure the temperature of the specimen. Schematic diagrams of the temperature histories during the tests are shown in Figure 1. Three types of temperature transient were adopted in the tests. In the case of Figure 1(a), the specimen was heated up to a target oxidation temperature (T1) at a rate of 10 K/s and then isothermally oxidized at T1. After the isothermal oxidation, the specimen was gradually cooled to approximately 973 K and quenched. In the case of Figure 1(b), the holding temperature for isothermal oxidation was changed stepwise from T1 to a second target oxidation temperature (T2). In the case of Figure 1(c), the specimen was heated up to T1, isothermally oxidized at T1 and quenched in a way similar to that shown in Figure 1(a). After the first quench, the specimen was heated up again to T2 at a rate of 10 K/s and then isothermally oxidized at T2. After the second isothermal oxidation, the specimen was cooled to approximately 973 K and finally quenched. Here, the first heating-up, isothermal oxidation and quenching simulate the temperature transient during a LOCA, and the second heating-up and isothermal oxidation simulate the temperature transient during a loss-of-LTCC. Since the oxidation kinetics of Zircaloy cladding is considered to be related to the phase structure of the oxide (ZrO2) layer (monoclinic or tetragonal structure) formed on the outer surface of cladding [2], this test was performed under the conditions where the target oxidation temperatures (T1 and T2) were between 1173 and 1473 K and the sum of the holding time at the target temperature (the sum of t1 and t2) was between 55 and 7200 s so that the temperature range could cover from the temperature lower than the temperature at which phase transformation of ZrO2 from monoclinic to tetragonal occurs [2] to the upper limit temperature according to the ECCS acceptance criteria of LWRs.
Figure 1. Schematic of the time–temperature profiles of the two-sided oxidation and quench tests: (a) isothermal oxidation, (b) change of holding temperature, (c) reheating after quenching.
The weight of each specimen was measured before and after the test, and then the weight gain per unit surface area was calculated. After the test, some of the specimens were transversely cut into two pieces for RCT. The thicknesses of the ZrO2 layer, oxygen-stabilized α-Zr (α–Zr(O)) layer and prior-β layer were measured based on the metallographs taken on a transverse section of the specimen: the thickness of each layer was measured at four different azimuthal positions near the inner and outer surfaces. The four thicknesses measured were averaged, and the averaged values were used for the analysis of oxidation behavior.
2.2. Ring compression test
This test was performed at 408 K by using an 8-mm-long specimen obtained from the specimen of the two-sided oxidation-and-quench test. A tensile testing machine with fixed flat support was used to compress the ring specimen. The rate of cross head displacement was 2.0 mm/min and the maximum displacement was 5.0 mm. Figure 2 shows a typical load–displacement curve. In this test, the load drop of 30% from the peak load was regarded as the formation of through-wall cracks along the axial direction of the specimen. If the load drop reached 30% during a sharp load drop, starting point of the sharp drop was regarded as the formation of the through-wall cracks. In order to evaluate the extent of the embrittlement of the specimen, an offset strain to failure was determined from the load–displacement curve.
Figure 2. Typical load–displacement curve for the ring compression test.
2.3. Semi-integral quench test
A cladding specimen of 190-mm length was prepared from the same Zircaloy-4 cladding tube as that used in the two-sided oxidation-and-quench test. Alumina pellets were inserted into the cladding specimen in order to simulate the heat capacity of UO2 fuel pellets. End plugs were connected to both ends of the specimen and formed the test rod, and each test rod was filled with argon gas of 5 MPa at room temperature. In order to control and measure the temperature of the cladding specimen during the test, R-type thermocouples were spot-welded on the outer surface of the cladding specimen at the three axial positions, i.e. the mid-height, 40 mm above and 40 mm below the mid-height of the specimen.
In this study, the apparatus similar to that shown in [4] was used. The test rod was held vertically at the center of the quartz reaction tube in the apparatus, and the lower end of the test rod was fixed on the base of the tensile testing machine. The upper end of the test rod was connected to the grab with a load cell in the apparatus so that the axial displacement of the test rod could be restrained and also the load generated during the test could be measured.
Similar to the two-sided oxidation-and-quench test, two types of temperature transients, i.e. ‘isothermal oxidation’ and ‘reheating-after-quenching (both target temperatures of T1 and T2 were the same: T1 = T2)’, were applied in this test. During the first heating-up phase, the cladding specimen ballooned and ruptured as a result of the inner pressure increase in the test rod and the decrease in the mechanical strength of the cladding specimen. In the case of the isothermal oxidation test, the upper end of the test rod was tightly fixed to the tensile testing machine at the end of the isothermal oxidation phase which followed the first heating-up phase, and the test rod was cooled and quenched under an axial fully restrained condition. In the case of the reheating-after-quenching test, the upper end of the test rod was axially restrained at the end of each isothermal oxidation phase. The maximum restrained load during the first cooling-and-quenching phase was controlled not to exceed 540 N: this maximum restraint load of 540 N was determined based on the values reported in the previous papers [4–6]. The second cooling-and-quenching was conducted under an axial fully restrained condition in order to obtain conservative results compared with those anticipated under a design-basis LOCA [4–6]. This test was performed under conditions where the target oxidation temperatures (T1 and T2) were 1373 or 1473 K and the total of each holding time at the target temperature (the sum of t1 and t2) was between 55 and 960 s. After the test, the wall thickness of the ballooned-and-ruptured cladding specimen was evaluated based on a photograph of a cross section taken at the center of the rupture opening and the wall thickness measured there was used to calculate Equivalent Cladding Reacted (ECR).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Two-sided oxidation-and-quench test
Figures 3 and 4 show the relationship between the total of each holding time at the target temperature and weight gain per unit surface area and that between the total of each holding time and the thicknesses of ZrO2 and α–Zr(O) layers for the oxidation at 1173 through 1473 K (T1 = T2), respectively. Figure 5 summarizes a typical metallograph of a transverse cross section magnified near the outer surface of each specimen after oxidation. As seen in Figures 3 and 4, the effects of quenching-and-reheating on the weight gain and the thicknesses of the layers seem to be insignificant in the cases where the target oxidation temperatures were 1173 and 1473 K. On the other hand, in the cases where the target oxidation temperatures were 1273 and 1373 K, the reheating-after-quenching process tends to suppress the weight gain and the growth of ZrO2 layer.
Figure 3. Correlation between weight gain and total of each holding time at the target temperature (T1 = T2; 1173, 1273, 1373 and 1473 K).
Figure 4. Correlation between thickness of oxide layers and total of each holding time at the target temperature (T1 = T2; 1173, 1273, 1373 and 1473 K).
Figure 5. Metallographs of the cross sections of specimens after oxidizing at 1373 and 1473 K (T1 = T2).
In order to confirm that the conditions of temperature transient would affect the oxidation behavior, the weight gains of the reheating-after-quenching cases was compared with those of the cases where holding temperatures changed. Table 1(a) summarizes the test conditions, ECRs calculated by using the Baker–Just correlation [7] and the temperature history recorded during the test and the weight gains in the various oxidation temperatures of the first isothermal period, namely T1 which is shown in Figure 1. The weight gains tend to be lower in the reheating-after-quenching cases than those in the isothermal cases, even though the calculated ECRs are about the same values in both cases. This tendency is remarkable when the T1 is 1273 K or higher. Table 1(b) summarizes the test conditions, ECRs and the weight gains in the various oxidation temperatures of the second isothermal period, namely T2 which is shown in Figure 1. The weight gains tend to be lower in the reheating-after-quenching cases when T2 is 1273 or 1373 K than those in the isothermal-heating cases.
Table 1. Test conditions and results of the two-sided oxidation and quench test to evaluate the effect of (a) first holding temperature and (b) second holding temperature.
From the results obtained under these temperature conditions and the oxidation behavior, the less amount of oxidation observed in this test due to the temperature transient is quite similar to ‘anomalous oxidation’ reported in the tests by Pawel [8,9]. The anomalous oxidation, which was defined in their paper as the phenomenon that the amount of oxidation was less than that expected by the parabolic law, occurred under certain two-peak temperature transients. Pawel et al. explained that the anomalous oxidation might be caused by the transformation of ZrO2 from the tetragonal phase to the monoclinic phase: oxygen diffusion in the monoclinic phase is slower than that in the tetragonal phase and the tetragonal phase which formed during the first heating process transforms into the monoclinic phase during the cooling process at <1173 K, and the monoclinic phase will persist until the oxide temperature reaches to about 1473 K during the second heating process. Gosset et al. conducted an X-ray diffraction analysis of the ZrO2 layer formed on the zirconium alloys, and confirmed that the phase composition in the ZrO2 layer under high-temperature oxidation changed during cooling and subsequent reheating processes [10,11]. In consideration of the results of these previous studies, when the re-oxidation of the cladding with oxide layer occurs, it is probable that the temperature at which the phase transition of ZrO2 from monoclinic phase to tetragonal phase occurred shifts to higher temperature than that of the first oxidation. Therefore, in the results of the present study, when the cladding specimen was re-heated and oxidized at a temperature of 1273 or 1373 K in steam, it is considered that a composition ratio of tetragonal phase in the ZrO2 layer in the reheating-after-quenching cases was less than that in the isothermal oxidation cases. When the cladding specimen was re-heated and oxidized at a temperature of 1173 or 1473 K, it is considered that the phase in the ZrO2 layer is either almost entirely monoclinic or tetragonal, respectively, regardless of the temperature transient.
3.2. Ring compression test
Figure 6 shows the offset strains obtained by RCT as a function of weight gain. As seen in the figure, the offset strains decreased with increasing amount of oxidation regardless of oxidation temperature or temperature transient. In the reheating-after-quenching cases where the target temperatures of T1 and T2 were 1373K and anomalous oxidation was observed, the decrease in offset strain per unit weight gain was larger than that of the normal oxidation cases.
Figure 6. Offset strains in the ring compression tests as a function of weight gain.
It has been considered that the ductility, that is the resistance against fracture, of oxidized Zircaloy cladding is based on the properties of prior-β layer since the ZrO2 and α–Zr(O) layers are brittle [12]. From this view point, the relationship between the thickness of prior-β layer in the ring specimen and the results of RCT were investigated. Figure 7 shows the thicknesses of prior-β layer after the two-sided oxidation-and-quench tests as a function of weight gain. In the reheating-after-quenching cases where the target temperature was 1373 K and the anomalous oxidation occurred, it was observed that the thicknesses of prior-β layer per unit weight gain tend to be lower than those in the normal oxidation cases. Therefore, it is expected that the thinner prior-β layer causes more decrease in the ductility of cladding specimen. Figure 8 shows the thicknesses of ZrO2, α–Zr(O) and prior-β layers after the two-sided oxidation-and-quench tests where the target temperatures T1 and T2 were 1373 K as a function of the total of each holding time at the target temperature (the sum of t1 and t2). Figure 9 shows schematic views of the normal and anomalous oxidation processes. It is considered that the amount of the oxygen diffused into the inner metallic part of the cladding is mainly controlled by the volume diffusion of oxygen atoms into the α–Zr(O) layer at high temperature, irrespective of the source of oxygen (i.e. ZrO2 or the steam in the surroundings of the specimen) [13]. The amount of oxygen diffused into the α–Zr(O) layer depends on the temperature and the gradient of oxygen concentration in the α–Zr(O) layer. When oxygen supply through the ZrO2 layer is more than the amount of oxygen that diffuses across the α–Zr(O) layer, the ZrO2 layer becomes thicker, and when the oxygen supply is less, the ZrO2 layer becomes thinner. In the normal oxidation condition, the ZrO2 layer became thicker with the progress of oxidation, and the α–Zr(O) layer was slightly thinner than that in anomalous oxidation due to the change from α–Zr(O) to ZrO2. The thickness of the α–Zr(O) layer affects the gradient of oxygen concentration and the amount of oxygen diffused into the inner metallic part. This means that the anomalous oxidation may decelerate the embrittlement of the cladding specimen, compared with the normal oxidation cases. However, as seen in Figure 8, the difference in the thickness of prior-β layer between the normal oxidation and the anomalous oxidation was small relative to the difference in the weight gain shown in Figure 3.
Figure 7. Correlation between thickness of prior-β layer and weight gain for the oxidation.
Figure 8. Correlation between thickness of layers and total of each holding time at a temperature of 1373 K (T1 = T2, t1 = 60 s).
Figure 9. Schematic view of the normal and anomalous oxidation process.
ECR is usually used as an indicator of the amount of oxidation in LOCA safety analyses. Therefore, it may be worth evaluating the test results including anomalous oxidation by ECR. Figure 10 shows the offset strains as a function of the ECR calculated by using the Baker–Just correlation [7]. As seen in this figure, the data of the anomalous oxidation agree well with those of the normal oxidation. It seems that the progression of embrittlement in cladding can be estimated even in the case of reheating-after-quench and the isothermal oxidation, if the ECR calculated by the Baker–Just correlation is used for evaluating the amount of oxidation.
Figure 10. Offset strains in the ring compression tests as a function of ECR calculated using the Baker–Just equation.
3.3. Semi-integral quench tests
The visual appearances and metallographs of longitudinal sections of typical post-test specimens after semi-integral quench tests are shown in Figure 11. In the cases of the isothermal oxidation, the outer surface of the cladding looks smooth and the thickness of each ZrO2 or α–Zr(O) layer looks uniform. In cases of the reheating-after-quenching, while the outer surface of cladding looks smooth, the thicknesses of the layers of ZrO2 and α–Zr(O) looks uniform only near the rupture elevation. In contrast, net-like cracks were observed on the outer surface of cladding several centimeters from the rupture elevation. Although the ZrO2 layer near the crack was thicker than the surrounding ZrO2 layer, the thickness of prior-β layer was scarcely affected by the presence or the absence of cracks. The thicker ZrO2 layer seen near the cracks indicates that cladding oxidation continued after the formation of these cracks, and therefore the cracks were probably formed at the time of the first quenching phase. Since the coolant water flows into the inside of the cladding from the rupture opening, both inside and outside surfaces of the cladding near the rupture opening are cooled at almost the same time. Therefore, the thermal stress near the rupture opening generated during the quenching of the test rod becomes smaller than that away from the rupture opening. Also taking into account the results that few cracks were observed on the specimens of the two-sided oxidation-and-quench tests, the main cause of the formation of the cracks is considered to be the thermal stress generated during the quenching of the test rod since there were few cracks near the rupture opening where less thermal stress was generated.
Figure 11. Appearances and metallographic longitudinal sections of specimens of the reheating-after-quenching and isothermal oxidation cases.
Figure 12 shows the relationship between the axial fracture load and ECR. The ECR is evaluated by using the Baker–Just equation for two-sided oxidation, based on the cladding thickness reduced by ballooning. In this test, a few test rods were fractured at the lower end. However, since it was considered that this type of fracture seemed not typical in this test, their data were excluded from this figure: the results of the destructive tests on the test rods fractured at the lower end suggested that excessive hydrogen embrittlement occurred, which might be due to the stagnation of hydrogen near the lower end of the test rods. As seen in Figure 12, the fracture loads tend to decrease with increasing ECR. Although thicker ZrO2 layer with cracks formed on the outer cladding surface by quenching, the difference in the fracture loads is insignificant between the isothermal oxidation cases and reheating-after-quenching cases. This result suggests that the mechanical properties of prior-β layer controls the extent of embrittlement of cladding irrespective of oxidation condition, that is isothermal or reheating-after-quenching, in steam.
Figure 12. Correlation between axial fracture load and ECR for the oxidation at 1373 and 1473 K.
4. Conclusion
In order to evaluate the effect of high-temperature oxidation and quenching during a LOCA on the oxidation and embrittlement behavior of cladding under loss of LTCC conditions, two-sided oxidation test, RCT and semi-integral quench tests were conducted on Zircaloy-4 cladding specimens with temperature transients which simulated post-quench reheat transients.
Two-sided oxidation test results showed that the amount of oxidation in the reheating-after-quenching cases tended to be less than that in the isothermal oxidation cases. This result suggested that the reheating process to a certain temperature caused the transition of the ZrO2 layer from the tetragonal phase to the monoclinic phase and this phase transition retarded oxidation compared with the isothermal oxidation case because the diffusion rate of oxygen in the monoclinic ZrO2 tends to be lower than that in the tetragonal ZrO2.
RCT results showed that the slower oxidation caused by the reheating-and-quenching process did not affect the extent of the embrittlement of the cladding specimen if the extent of the embrittlement of the cladding specimen was compared on the basis of the ECR calculated by using the Baker–Just correlation.
Semi-integral quench test results showed that the thermal stress generated in the cladding specimen during the quenching process of the test rod induced the formation of cracks in the oxide layer. Nevertheless, fracture load seemed unaffected by the temperature transient.
According to the above test results, while the oxidation and quenching during a LOCA could affect subsequent oxidation behavior, it did not substantially affect the embrittlement behavior during quenching-and-reheating transients. It is considered that the results of this study will provide useful information about the fracture limit of fuel cladding during a loss of LTCC.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Mr K. Hagiya in performing the tests necessary for this study.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
