<title>Preparation and assessment of magnetic graphene oxide/chitosan composite for removing radiocobalt from aqueous solution</title>
<author> Yinggen Ouyang; Jia Deng; Zhongcun Chen; Lin Yang; Songtao Xiao; Lingyu Wang; Yaolin Zhao</author>
<Affiliation>China Institute of Atomic Energy, Beijing, 102413, People’s Republic of China;Department of Radiation Oncology, Shaanxi Provincial Cancer Hospital, Xi’an, 710061, People’s Republic of China;School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, People’s Republic of China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-020-07462-5</DOI>
<URL>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-020-07462-5?utm_source</URL>
Abstract
A novel adsorbent of magnetic graphene oxide/chitosan (MGOC) composite has been prepared via chemical cross-linking method, and exhibits an extraordinary sorption capacity (about 59.82 mg/g) towards cobalt ions. The batch experiments revealed that MGOC is weakly affected by ionic strength and pH-dependent for cobalt ions sorption. The sorption process is spontaneous and endothermic according to thermodynamic parameters, following the pseudo-second-order model. In view of low price, high adsorption capacity, great saturation magnetization and perfect reusability, the MGOC composite maybe has a potential value in treatment of radiocobalt-containing wastewater.
Introduction
As one of the most promising carbon nanomaterial, graphene has attracted tremendous interest in the electrical, mechanical, optical and thermal study due to its excellent and unique properties [1]. Especially, a relative high specific surface area which is 2630 m2/g in theory [2] makes graphene possess a broad application prospect for contaminant removal in water system. However, the poor dispersion of pristine graphene is not conducive to its interaction with contaminants in wastewater, so that restricts its application as an adsorbent [3, 4]. Thus, graphene is usually modified with some molecules or groups to improve adsorption ability, for instance, graphene oxide (GO) shows obvious removal effect for various heavy metals [5, 6] and radionuclides [7]. In addition, it is found that GO combined with some inorganic nanoparticles or organic functional groups could achieve a better adsorption performance [8].
Inorganic nanoparticles mainly include metal or metal oxide, such as Fe3O4, Al2O3 and TiO2 [9,10,11]. Among these metal or metal oxides, magnetic iron oxides have been extensively used. In the previous study, the magnetic GO has exhibited well adsorption capacity for heavy metals, and it can be separated and collected with a magnet easily, thereby overcoming the separation problem of graphene-based materials [12, 13]. Likewise, magnetic GO composite has been proven effective to remediate wastewater containing radionuclide [7, 14].
The organic functional groups are usually introduced by polymers, aromatic molecules and biomolecules [15]. They not only enhance the adsorption capacity of graphene-based materials significantly because of the abundant hydrophilic and negative-charged functional groups, but also improve the recovery ability of graphene-based materials [16]. Among these organic modification materials, chitosan has received intensive interest for its biocompatibility, hydrophilicity and nontoxicity [17]. Previous research shows that the composite consisting of chitosan and 5 wt.% GO has a wide working pH and higher maximum adsorption capacity towards Pd(II) and Au(III) compared with pristine GO or chitosan. Moreover, it can be repeatedly used for 3 cycles with no significant change in adsorption capacity and desorption percentage [18].
Considering the advantages of GO, magnetic nanoparticles and chitosan, a new efficient adsorbent is tried to synthesize in present study. This novel magnetic graphene oxide/chitosan (MGOC) composite may possess excellent features of high adsorption capacity, easy separation, recyclability and environmental friendliness, which are consistent with the demands for adsorbent used to tackle water pollution problem.
60Co is widely utilized in various irradiation processing field including medical radiotherapy and laboratory mutagenesis. However, due to the emission of high energy gamma ray and relatively long half-life, the excessive discharge of 60Co into environment would cause diarrhea and paralysis [19]. Thus, to investigate the applicability of MGOC composite in the radiocobalt-containing wastewater treatment, the adsorption behavior of 60Co(II) on MGOC composite is studied, in which the stable Co(II) is chosen as adsorbate to take the place of 60Co(II).
In the paper, the preparation of MGOC composite is introduced, and a combination of vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) is used to unravel the sorption mechanism. Moreover, the effects of ionic strength, solution pH, temperature and solid content on Co(II) adsorption are explored by batch method. The sorption kinetic and thermodynamic parameters are also determined.
Reagents and methods
Reagents
The graphite powder (particle size ≤ 30 μm), FeCl3·6H2O and FeCl2·4H2O are used as raw materials to synthesize magnetic graphene oxide (MGO), all of which are purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent, China. The molecular weight, degree of deacetylation and particle size of chitosan (Golden-Shell Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. China) are 150,000 Da, 85–95% and 180 μm, respectively. The glutaraldehyde (C5H8O2, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and sodium tripolyphosphate (NaTPP, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent, China) are used as cross-linking agents of MGO with chitosan. The CoCl2·6H2O (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent, China) which is dissolved in ultrapure water is used as adsorbate. The chromogenic agent and buffer medium are identical with our previous study [20]. All reagents are in analytical purity and used without purification.
Synthesis of MGOC composite
With graphite powder and chitosan as raw materials, the preferred MGOC composite and two intermediate products are synthesized step by step. Firstly, Hummers’ method [21] is employed to prepare graphene oxide (GO). 2 g graphite powder is put into 25 mL concentrated H2SO4 followed by stirring at < 5 °C, then 6 g KMnO4 is gradually added and stirred for half hour inside the ice bath. At this low temperature stage, intercalation is the predominant reaction of graphite with oxidants (KMnO4 and H2SO4). Then, the reaction flask is bathed in water and kept at 35–40 °C for a long time (about 3 h) to ensure the graphite is oxidized completely. After that, 100 mL distilled water is gradually added with violent stirring, increasing the reaction temperature to 85 °C and maintained for 1 h, during which the oxidized graphite slices would be stripped from each other. As the stripping reaction is accomplished, the residual oxidants are reduced by adding 20 mL 30% H2O2. The mixture is washed with 10% HCl solution and ultrapure water until the solution becomes neutral. At last, GO is obtained by ultrasonic dispersing for 30 min and drying in vacuum oven at 40 °C. In the above procedure, one has to note the sequence of adding oxidants (KMnO4 and H2SO4) and reaction temperature to avoid explosion accident.
Magnetic graphene oxide (MGO) is synthesized with the prepared GO using chemical co-precipitation method [22]. Firstly, iron salt solution is obtained through dissolving 0.5 g FeCl3·6H2O and 0.2 g FeCl2·4H2O into distilled water. Under the condition of N2 purification and water bath at 60 °C, the iron salt solution is poured into GO dispersion (1 g/l), and followed by adding ammonia solution (30% v/v) to regulate solution pH to 10. Then, in order to allow the magnetic Fe3O4 being synthesized sufficiently and combined onto GO surface, the mixture is continuously stirred for 1 h. Finally, the produced MGO is separated by magnetic field, washed and dried.
Magnetic graphene oxide/chitosan (MGOC) composite is prepared via the cross-linking method by using NaTPP and glutaraldehyde. After dissolved in 20 mL acetic acid (3% v/v) at room temperature, 0.5 g chitosan is treated with ultrasonication for 30 min. 0.05 g MGO is dispersed in 60 mL ultrapure water by ultrasonication. The prepared MGO dispersion is transfered into the chitosan solution with vigorous stirring for 1 h. Subsequently, the produced magnetic graphene oxide-chitosan (MGOC) composite hydrogel is injected dropwise into 0.05 mol/L NaTPP, stored and stirred gently for 24 h. After removing excessive sodium and tripolyphosphate ions through rinsing by deionized water intensively, the MGOC composite beads are moved into a mixed solution of 3 mL 25% glutaraldehyde solution and 50 mL methanol, and continuously stirred at 150 rpm for another 6 h. After washing by ultrapure water and anhydrous ethanol for several times, the MGOC composite beads are dried by using vacuum oven at 40 °C.
Characterization of adsorbent
For the raw and prepared materials (graphite, chitosan, GO, MGO and MGOC) involved in the experiments, a systematic investigation on their physicochemical properties is performed. Their functional groups are recorded by FT-IR spectrometer (Bruker Tensor 27). The surface morphologies and crystalline phases are examined by SEM (JEOL JSM-7800F) and XRD (PANalytical X’Pert PRO), respectively. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas are measured by a surface area analyzer (Builder SSA-4300) with N2 as adsorption–desorption medium. Vibrating sample magnetometer (Quantum Design MPMS-SQUID-VSM-094) is operated to measure magnetism by applied magnetic field.
Batch sorption experiments
Batch experiments is performed to investigate Co(II) sorption on prepared MGOC composite. The sorption is evaluated by sorption percentage (%) and distribution coefficient (Kd).
Kd=C0−CeCeVm
(1)
Sorption(%)=C0−CeC0×100%
(2)
where C0 and Ce represent initial and equilibrium concentration, respectively; m and V are MGOC composite mass and suspension volume, respectively.
All Co(II) adsorption experiments on MGOC composite are performed in triplicate under ambient conditions with average uncertainties below 5%. Firstly, the MGOC composites are pre-equilibrated in NaCl solutions for 1 day. Subsequently, the Co(II) stock solutions are injected into, and the desired concentrations of various components are obtained. Through adding minute amounts of 0.01, 0.1 mol/L HCl or NaOH solution, the destination pH values of suspensions are achieved. The sorption reaches equilibrium after shaking suspensions for 6 h, and the mixtures are separated by a permanent magnet. Then, a mixture of distilled water, 2 ml supernatant, 4 ml chromogenic agent and 5 ml buffer solution is heated about 10 min at 328.15 K, and its value of light absorbance is measured by the UV–vis spectrophotometer.
During sorption kinetics study, the MGOC composite content and initial Co(II) concentration are 0.5 g/L and 10 mg/L, respectively. The background solution is taken as 0.1 mol/L NaCl. The experimental temperature is 298.15 K and solution pH is about 7.0. The suspensions are oscillated under orbital shaker for 0–6 h. To explore the effects of ionic strength and solution pH, 0.001, 0.01 and 0.1 mol/L NaCl are selected with pH in the range of 3–12. The contact time of Co(II) with MGOC composite is fixed at 6 h. The initial Co(II) concentration and experimental temperature are identical to those in the kinetic studies. The ratio of solid to liquid is changed from 0.1 to 1.6 g/L to explore the effect of solid content, and the rest is identical to the ionic strength and pH investigations. A initial Co(II) concentration between 4 and 48 mg/L is employed to achieve the equilibrium sorption isotherm. A shaking of suspensions lasts for 6 h under 298.15, 318.15 and 338.15 K, respectively. The solid/liquid ratio is 0.5 g/L, and the rest is identical to solid content investigation.
Results and discussion
MGOC characterization
The chemical structures of chitosan, GO, MGO, and MGOC composite are investigated by FT-IR spectra. As shown in Fig. 1, various functional groups are observed for GO. The peak at 3400 cm−1 is attributed to stretching of O–H, and 1620 cm−1 to epoxide groups, skeletal ring and O–H bending vibration. The peaks at 1402 and 1053 cm−1 correspond to stretching vibration of C–OH and C–O–C, respectively. The peak at 1724 cm−1 is attributed to stretching vibration of C=O in carboxylic acid or carbonyl moiety. For MGO, besides some similar peaks appeared in GO, there is another characteristic peak of magnetic Fe3O4 observed obviously at 580 cm−1, which demonstrates that Fe3O4 is successfully synthesized and combined onto GO, meanwhile the chemical structure and functional groups of GO are properly preserved in MGO.
@
For chitosan, the multiple overlaps of stretching vibrations of amino group and hydroxyl group result in a wide adsorption band at 2750–3600 cm−1. The peaks at 1660 cm−1 and 1377 cm−1 is attributed to the C=O stretching vibration of –NHCO– (amide I) and C–H deformation vibration of –CH3, respectively. The adsorption band of 1068 cm−1 is related to the stretching vibrations of C–O–C and C–O. Due to the more content of chitosan in preparation, MGOC composite’s FT-IR spectrum is very similar to chitosan. Compared with chitosan, the characteristic peaks including those at 1660, 1377 and 1068 cm−1 are also appeared, while their intensities are slightly increased or decreased in MGOC. These variations may mainly result from the amidation reaction, Schiff’s base reaction and acetalation reaction among various functional groups (carboxyl, carbonyl, hydroxyl and amido) of chitosan, MGO and glutaraldehyde during MGOC preparation, in which some new functional group –NHCO and C=N, C–O–C bond would be formed [23,24,25]. In the spectra of MGOC composite, one can also find the characteristic peak of magnetic Fe3O4 still exists at 580 cm−1.
Figure 2 displays the XRD patterns of MGOC composite and its compositions (graphite, GO, Fe3O4, MGO and chitosan). It is concluded that the d-spacing of graphite is 3.4 Å according to the peak at 2θ = 26.2°. Whereas GO and MGO peak at 2θ = 10.8° indicates its d-spacing is 8.1 Å, and the graphite has been successfully oxidized to GO. Atomic-scale roughness resulted from the introduction of rich oxygen-containing functional groups on graphene surface can explain why d-spacing of GO sheets increases [26]. The diffraction peaks of MGO and MGOC at 30.1°, 35.4°, 43.2°, 53.6°, 57.1°, 62.6° correspond to the typical (2 2 0), (3 1 1), (4 0 0), (4 2 2), (5 1 1), (4 4 0) planes of Fe3O4 (JCPDS file No. 19-0629) which is a face-centered cube [26], while the MGOC characteristic peak at 2θ = 20.8° originates from chitosan. It is conformed once again that Fe3O4 is successfully synthesized and combined onto GO for MGO preparation. Meanwhile, MGO is effectively cross-linked with chitosan during MGOC composite synthesis.
To investigate their morphologies, GO, MGO and MGOC composite are characterized by SEM. From Fig. 3, one can find clearly that GO presents a typical sheet-like structure and wrinkled surface (Fig. 3a), and Fe3O4 particles are anchored on MGO surface (Fig. 3b). In comparison with GO or MGO, MGOC composite has a much rougher surface (Fig. 3c), which is consistent with its large surface area (in present experiments, the measured BET surface areas of GO, MGO and MGOC composite are 71.4 m2/g, 17.9 m2/g and 169.7 m2/g, respectively).
The magnetization measurements for MGO and MGOC composite are performed by VSM with an external magnet of 20,000 Oe. The obtained magnetic hysteresis loops of MGO and MGOC composite are shown in Fig. 4. One can find that the saturation magnetizations of MGO and MGOC composite are 31.56 and 22.55 emu/g, respectively. Though less than the saturation magnetization of bare Fe3O4 particles (46.7 emu/g reported in literature [27]), they are enough for the separations of MGO and MGOC composite by an external magnet. The inset of Fig. 4 has shown that MGOC composite can be easily attracted toward an external magnet.
Sorption kinetics
Figure 5 displays the sorption of Co(II) on MGOC composite as the contact time changes. It is obvious that the sorption percentage increases sharply within the initial 1 h, then reaches a plateau. Therefore, to ensure the complete equilibrium a fixed contact time of 6 h is used. In the present paper, the pseudo-first-order [28] and pseudo-second-order kinetic model [29] are selected to determine the kinetic parameters. Two models representing different controlling mechanisms of adsorption process were used to examine the adsorption experiments. They are usually described in Eqs. (3) and (4), respectively.
ln(qe−qt)=lnqe−K1t
(3)
tqt=12k2q2e+1qet
(4)
qt=(C0−Ct)V/m
(5)
qe=(C0−Ce)V/m
(6)
where qt (mg/g) is total Co(II) adsorbed on MGOC composite at time t (h), qe (mg/g) represents equilibrium sorption capacity; K1 (/h) and K2 (g/(mg∙h)) are pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order rate constants, respectively.
The obtained kinetic parameters are summarized in Table 1, where q expe (mg/g) is measured in experiment. From the differences of R2, it is clear that the pseudo-second-order model fits the data better than the pseudo-first-order model, and chemisorption may play an important role. However, one has note that the correlation coefficients of pseudo-first-order model is also enough high to explain the experimental results. As stated in literature [30], there exists various interactions in the adsorption process, for instance, pore diffusion, surface diffusion, film diffusion, and other second interactions. The adsorption kinetics could be explained using different models, and it is difficult to define the kinetics with a single model.
Impacts of ionic strength and pH
The effects of ionic strength and solution pH are shown in Fig. 6. One can see that solution pH is critical to Co(II) sorption on MGOC composite. The sorption percentage firstly increases slowly when pH lower than 5, then increases rapidly in the range of 5–10, finally maintains a high level when pH > 10, which is in line with Co(II) adsorption on MWCNTs [31]. The surface charge and functional groups dissociation of MGOC composite maybe result in an increasing sorption percentage with the pH increases. Another possible reason is the predominant Co(II) complexation under a specific solution pH. The point of zero charge (PZC) is of benefit to analyze the effect of pH on adsorption behavior [30]. Previous study indicates the PZC of graphene oxide/magnetite chitosan is 7.2 [32], which is similar with MGOC. Meanwhile, it demonstrates the surface charge of MGOC is positive when pH < 7.2, then it becomes negatively charged with increasing pH value.
From Fig. 7, one can find Co(II) can coexist in the form of Co(OH)+, Co(OH)2,Co(OH) −3 and Co2+ under various solution pH [33]. Because of protonation reaction (≡SOH+H+⇔≡SOH+2), the positively charged edge groups (≡SOH+2) of MGOC composite have an electrostatic repulsion for Co2+, which maybe cause a relative low sorption percentage at pH < 5. However, owing to surface deprotonation reaction (≡SOH⇔±≡SO−+H+), the increasing deprotonated sites (≡SO−) would enhance the sorption of Co(OH)+ and Co2+ cation by columbic attraction as the pH increases. The insoluble hydroxide Co(OH)2 takes a dominant place when pH > 10, which would precipitate and contribute to the high removal percentage.
The adsorption of Co(II) on MGOC as a function of ionic strength is studied by using NaCl solutions (0.001–0.1 mol/L). Figure 7 shows that it is weakly influenced by ionic strength for Co(II) sorption onto MGOC composite. Compared with inner-sphere surface complexation (ISSC), cation exchange and outer-sphere surface complexation (OSSC) are more sensitive to the variation of ionic strength [34]. The interaction between Co(II) and MGOC composite is more in line with ISSC according to the experimental results.
Impact of solid content
Figure 8 displays the Co(II) sorption percentage and distribution function at different solid contents. The sorption percentage increases as solid content increases. This phenomenon is likely attributed to the more functional sites on MGOC surfaces at high solid content, promoting the complexation between Co(II) and MGOC composite. From Fig. 8, one can find the Kd values are nearly unrelated to sorbent content. It is suggested that there is almost no competition among the function groups on MGOC surface.
Sorption isotherms
Freundlich and Langmuir isotherms are employed to interpret sorption experiment data [35, 36]. The latter supposes the adsorption can’t exceed monolayer coverage and all adsorption sites are identical. It also supposes the adsorption of solute is independent of surrounding molecules, which is calculated as follows:
qe=bqmaxCe1+bCe
(7)
where Ce (mg/L) is equilibrium concentration of Co(II) in solution, qe (mg/g) is total adsorbed Co(II) after equilibrium, the maximum sorption capacity qmax (mg/g) is amount of sorbate at complete monolayer coverage, and b (L/mol) is a constant concerning the sorption heat. In addition, one dimensionless parameter RL calculated in Eq. (8) can be used to identify a sorption process is unfavorable (RL > 1), linear (RL = 1), favorable (0 < RL < 1), or irreversible (RL = 0) [37].
RL=11+bC0
(8)
where C0 (mol/L) represents initial Co(II) concentration in solution.
Different from Langmuir isotherm, the Freundlich isotherm assumes heterogeneous sorption owing to the diversity of sorption sites or metal ions adsorbed. The Freundlich model is represented by
qe=kFCne
(9)
where kF (mol1−nLn/g) represents the sorption capacity when the equilibrium concentration of metal ion equals to 1, and n represents the Freundlich sorption intensity parameter.
As shown in Fig. 9, the sorption isotherms of Co(II) on MGOC composite at three different temperatures are presented. One can find the sorption isotherm increases with increasing of temperature, which implies elevated temperature enhances Co(II) adsorption on MGOC composite. Table 2 presents the related calculated parameters based on Langmuir and Freundlich models. From correlation coefficient R2, one could conclude the sorption data are more in line with Langmuir model, indicating that it is almost completely covered by monolayer on MGOC surface. The adsorption is favorable according to the values of 0 < RL < 1 (in Table 2). Clearly, calculated by Freundlich model, the n values of 0.609–0.793 (< 1) indicate that the sorption on MGOC composite surface is nonlinear.
Thermodynamic parameters
The whole adsorption process involves the change of enthalpy and entropy. Thus, the Gibbs free energy change (ΔG0), standard entropy change (ΔS0) and average standard enthalpy change (ΔH0) are of significant to understand the degree of spontaneity and exothermic or endothermic nature of reaction. Usually, they are determined by the temperature-dependent sorption equations:
ΔG0=−RTlnK0
(10)
ΔS0=−(∂ΔG0∂ΔT)
(11)
ΔH0=ΔG0+TΔS0
(12)
where R is ideal gas constant (8.315 J/(mol K)), T (K) and K0 are absolute temperature and sorption equilibrium constant, respectively. The values of lnK0 are obtained by plotting lnKd versus Ce (Fig. 10) and extrapolating Ce to zero, which are 8.00 at 298.15 K, 8.35 at 318.15 K and 8.42 at 338.15 K, respectively.
To shed light on the adsorption mechanism of Co(II) on MGOC composite, the thermodynamic parameters are analyzed. Table 3 lists the thermodynamic parameters calculated from Eqs. (10–12). The ΔH0 values are higher than 0, indicating the sorption is endothermic. Because the endothermic process is related with various events including dissociation, dehydration and complexation [38]. It can be explained that the hydration number of Co2+ would decrease in order to be adsorbed, during which the consumed energy of dehydration is higher than the releasing energy of Co(II) cation attaching onto MGOC surface. The positive ΔS0 value represents increasing disorderness, arising from the dehydration of cobalt ions. This reveals the MGOC composite has a high affinity with Co(II) and the MGOC surface structure has changed [39]. A larger negative value of ΔG0 with increasing temperature enhances the sorption efficiency of MGOC composite at elevated temperature. It also suggests the adsorption is more likely to occur as the temperature increases. The elevated temperature promotes desolvation of cation, which is in favor of cation adsorption [40, 41]. Above all, the obtained thermodynamic parameters demonstrate it is spontaneous and endothermic for Co(II) adsorption on MGOC composite.
Reversibility and regeneration
The reusability of adsorbent is essential to the practical application. The adsorbent which has higher adsorption capability and better regeneration ability will significantly reduce the overall cost of waste water treatment. To analyze the reversibility and regeneration of MGOC composite, five consecutive adsorption–desorption cycles are conducted, in which the desorption of Co(II) is performed by 0.1 M HCl at room temperature. Figure 11 shows that the desorption rate in the fifth adsorption–desorption cycle is still higher than 85.0%, indicating that most of Co(II) adsorbed on MGOC composite could be desorbed with 0.1 M HCl. Moreover, after five successive adsorption–desorption cycles the sorption rate on MGOC composite only decreases a little (from 47.6 to 38.3%). The perfect reusability suggests that MGOC composite may be an economic adsorbent in practical application.
Sorption capacity comparison
A comparison of maximum sorption capacity (qmax, calculated by Langmuir model) is made between MGOC composite and several other adsorbents to further assess the potential application value. Compared with most of adsorbents, MGOC composite has much higher sorption capacity (Table 4). Considering the perfect reusability and high sorption capacity, MGOC composite may be an excellent absorbent for radiocobalt-containing wastewater remediation.
Conclusions
The MGOC composite is synthesized through a novel approach for Co(II) removal. The characterizations by FT-IR, XRD, SEM and VSM indicate that MGO is effectively cross-linked with chitosan, and MGOC composite is successfully synthesized. MGOC composite has great saturation magnetization and fast separation ability under an external magnetic field. The sorption of Co(II) on MGOC composite is less influenced by ionic strength and highly dependent of pH, following the model of pseudo–second-order. From thermodynamic perspective, the sorption process is endothermic and spontaneous. MGOC composite exhibits an extraordinary removal capacity towards Co(II) ion, and the maximum sorption capacity is 59.82 mg/g. Considering its high affinity towards Co(II) ion, great saturation magnetization and perfect reusability, one can conclude that MGOC composite is of benefit to the remediation of radiocobalt-containing wastewater.
