<title>Dissolution of synthetic uranium dibutyl phosphate (U-DBP) in sodium EDTA and sodium carbonate based formulations</title>
<author>A.L. Rufus; M.K. Dhanesh; S. Velmurugan</author>
<Affiliation>Water and Steam Chemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre Facilities, Kalpakkam, 603102, Tamilnadu, India;Department of Chemistry, University of Calicut, Calicut, 673635, Kerala, India</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2017.07.014</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197017301816</URL>
Abstract
Nuclear fuel reprocessing facilities that use tributyl phosphate (TBP) and nitric acid tend to develop a sticky coating of uranium dibutyl phosphate (U-DBP) on their surfaces. This sticky coating also gets formed on the reprocessing waste storage tanks on long standing, which results in radiation exposure hazard. Hence, it is required to periodically dissolve U-DBP deposits. Investigations on the dissolution of synthetic U-DBP in powder form with EDTA, disodium salt of EDTA (Na2-EDTA) and sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) have been investigated. Studies were also carried out with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) as the oxidizing agent, though due caution has to be exercised while handling it apart from the undesirable corrosion of structural materials. Of the formulations evaluated, 1% Na2-EDTA containing 1% H2O2 and 0.5% Na2CO3 were found to yield more than 90% dissolution. On considering the disadvantages of H2O2, sodium carbonate is considered to be suitable for the dissolution of U-DBP.
Keywords：Nuclear fuel；Reprocessing；Uranium；Dibuty；l phosphate；Dissolution；Sodium carbonate
1. Introduction
One of the challenges faced world-wide by the nuclear industry is the handling of spent fuel, which envisages on the storage, reprocessing and re-use. One of the process for the reprocessing of used fuels, utilizes tributyl phosphate (TBP) for recovering the elements of interest, especially uranium and plutonium. It is possible on prolong operation of the reprocessing plants or on long storage of the reprocessing wastes containing metal ions and TBP, the TBP undergoes hydrolysis to form dibutyl phosphate (DBP) and mono butyl phosphate (MBP). These hydrolyzed products will react with uranium to form respective complexes viz., uranium dibutyl phosphate (U-DBP) and uranium monobutyl phosphate (U-MBP). It is observed that, U-MBP has appreciable solubility and hence remains in solution while U-DBP with limited solubility gets precipitated to form sticky coating on the internals of the storage tanks or the reprocessing facility leading to radiation exposure hazard. The reactions involved in the formation of U-DBP precipitate is given below (Arnikar, 1995, Simpson and Law, 2010, Ramanujam, 1998, Spent Fuel Reprocessing Options, 2008, Pierce and Thompson, 1998):
@ 1
@ 2
@ 3
It is essential to remove such deposits from the surfaces either by physical or chemical methods. However, chemical methods will be more suitable to tackle them considering the radiation exposure hazard. By dissolving them in a suitable chemical formulation and removing them from the system followed by proper disposal will result in minimizing the radiation exposure of the operating and maintenance personnel. Thus, investigations to evaluate a suitable and effective chemical formulation assumes importance. Accordingly, dissolution studies with synthetically prepared U-DBP deposits were carried out using permanganate and nitrilo triacetic acid (NTA) based chemical formulations and the findings were reported in an earlier publication (Rufus et al., 2013). In the present investigation, ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA), a well known chelating agent and its di-sodium salt (Na2-EDTA) were explored. From the literature, it was seen that sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) is used for the extraction of uranium from its ores. Hence, Na2CO3 was also explored in the present investigation for dissolving U-DBP. Further, the dissolution of uranium containing compound is favorable in the presence of an oxidizing medium (Conner et al., 1997), and hence dissolution was also carried out in formulations containing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) as oxidant and the results are discussed in this paper.
2. Methods and materials
2.1. Reagents
All chemicals used were of AR/GR grade. Na2CO3 was from SD fine chemicals limited, EDTA and Na2-EDTA were from Ranbaxy Fine chemicals limited, Triuranium octoxide (U3O8) was obtained from a reprocessing plant.
2.2. Instruments
The concentration of uranium in solution was analyzed by Horiba Jobin Yvon (Ultima-2 model) Inductively Coupled Plasma - Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES) by standard calibration method. The wave length used for the analysis was 385.958 nm. The relative deviation for the quantification of uranium was around 5%.
3. Experimental
3.1. Experimental set-up
The reaction chamber is a double-walled vessel fitted with a condenser, a heater cum stirrer, provisions to purge the contents with inert gas (argon) to expel the dissolved oxygen. Preliminary experiments with Na2-EDTA and Na2CO3 formulations showed appreciable dissolution of U-DBP at ambient temperatures and hence most of the experiments were carried out at 35 °C close to the ambient temperature (32 °C) using thermostatic bath. In the case of pure EDTA, the temperature was maintained at 90 °C, since dissolution was poor. To know the effect of temperature on the dissolution of U-DBP in Na2CO3 formulation, experiments were also carried out at 50 and 65 °C.
3.2. Preparation of U-DBP
U3O8 was the precursor for the preparation of U-DBP. The procedure involved the conversion of U3O8 to uranyl nitrate [UO2(NO3)2], which was then converted to U-DBP by solution precipitation by the addition of DBP (Gray, 2010).
@(4)
@(5)
A sticky yellow precipitate of U-DBP that separated out was washed, filtered through nylon membrane. The U-DBP obtained was in the powdered form, which was characterized by Raman Spectroscopy. Fig. 1 gives the Raman spectrum for the synthesized U-DBP.
Fig. 1. Raman spectrum of synthesized U-DBP.
The spectrum showed the vibrational modes at 480.9, 795.7, 843.0, 1123.7, 1307.6 and 2921.1 cm−1. Based on the Raman spectrum of U-TBP and basic understanding on the vibrational modes, it is concluded that Raman peaks at 480.9 cm−1 is due to the phosphate in plane bending vibration (Frost et al., 2007). The peak at 795.7 cm−1 and the strong vibrational mode at 843 cm−1 are due to the symmetric stretching vibration of (UO2)2+ unit. The Raman shifts at 1123 cm−1 is due to (PO4)3- anti-symmetric stretching. The peak at 1307 cm−1 is due to U-OH deformation (Frost et al., 2007). The peak at 2921.1 cm−1 is due to the C-H bond (Snyder et al., 1978) present in U-DBP. Thus, the information provided by Raman spectrum, the formation of U-DBP was confirmed.
3.3. Dissolution experiment
A known volume (500 mL) of the formulation was taken in the double-walled vessel and purged with argon if dissolved oxygen need to be removed. Once the desired temperature was attained, 500 mg of the U-DBP powder, which was sonicated for 10 min was added into the vessel. Sampling was done periodically and analyzed for uranium to follow the extent of dissolution. The percentage dissolution was calculated from equation (6) given below:
@(6)
where,
Cx = Concentration of uranium in solution at the end of the experiment
Co=Concentration of uranium in solution on assuming complete dissolution
Cubic rate law or the Shrinking-core model was applied to calculate the rate constants for the dissolution process, since U-DBP was taken in the form of a powder (O'Brien et al., 1987, Segal and Sellers, 1982). The rate constant can be obtained from the following equation.
@(7)
where,
α = Ct/Co and kobs = k/ρr
Ct = Concentration at time ‘t’
Ct = Concentration on complete dissolution
k = rate constant
kobs = observed rate constant
ρ = density of (U-DBP)
r = radius of the particle
In this model, the process of dissolution is visualized as the reduction in radius of the particles with time and the dissolution is assumed to be isotropic i.e., the particles retain their shape. The slope of the linear portion of the plot, (1−α)1/3 Vs time ‘t’ where ‘α’ is the fraction dissolved at time ‘t’ gives the rate constant, ‘kobs’.
In the case of Na2CO3 formulation, though the rate of dissolution was appreciable even at 35 °C, the dissolution experiments were also carried out at higher temperatures (50 and 65 °C) to evaluate the effect of temperature. Arrhenius equation was used for calculating the activation energy from the plot of log k Vs 1/T.
@(8)
where,
k = rate constant
A = Arrhenius constant
ΔE = Activation energy
R = universal gas constant = 8.31 J mol−1 K−1
T = Temperature in Kelvin
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Dissolution of U-DBP
4.1.1. EDTA based formulations
EDTA is a well known chelating agent, which is also used as a constituent in the chemical formulations for the decontamination of water cooled nuclear reactors coolant circuit surfaces (Remark, 1981, Petit et al., 1980, Velmurugan et al., 1995) and also for the chemical cleaning of nuclear steam generators (Rufus et al., 2001). Hence, EDTA and EDTA based formulations were tried for the dissolution of U-DBP deposits, an important problem which is also associated with the nuclear industries. Table 1 gives the percentage dissolution of U-DBP and Fig. 2 gives the build-up of uranium as a function of time.
Table 1. Percentage dissolution of U-DBP in EDTA based formulations.
Fig. 2. Dissolution of U-DBP as a function of time in EDTA based formulations.
The data from the above table shows that the dissolution obtained in the case of pure EDTA (acid form) is very low. The concentration of EDTA was only 0.04%; the limitation being its low solubility. The maximum solubility of EDTA at room temperature is only 0.04%. The number of moles of EDTA present in the formulation is 1.4 × 10−3 mol/L and EDTA being a hexa-dentate ligand, it will form 1:1 complex. Thus, the maximum uranium expected to come into solution is 1.4 × 10−3 mol/L. However, from the analysis it was found that the uranium concentration in solution was only 0.2 × 10−3 mol/L. The reason for such a low dissolution may be:
i
Concentration of EDTA is very low.
ii
Acidic pH of the EDTA solution. It is well known that complex formation is not favorable at low pH conditions and hence the kinetics of dissolution will be low (Rufus et al., 1998).
In order to increase the concentration of chelating agent in the formulation, Na2-EDTA, a salt of EDTA, which has higher solubility when compared to acid EDTA was explored for the dissolution of U-DBP. Besides, the pH of its 1% solution is 4.5, which implies a favorable condition for complex formation and hence better kinetics for the dissolution of U-DBP. From literature, it was also seen that the dissolution of uranium containing compounds are favorable in the presence of oxidizing medium (Kweto et al., 2014). Hence, dissolution was also carried out in formulations containing H2O2 as oxidant.
Na2-EDTA was expected to dissolve U-DBP easily when compared to acid EDTA (Fig. 2). Hence, experiments were carried out at a much less rigorous conditions (at 35 °C) when compared to acid EDTA, where the temperature was maintained at 90 °C. The percentage dissolution obtained was almost two folds on changing the formulation from 0.04% EDTA to 0.1% Na2-EDTA while five folds on increasing the concentration of Na2-EDTA from 0.1% to 1%.
In the presence of H2O2, the rate of dissolution was expected to increase further. Being an oxidant, H2O2 will oxidize the organic part of the U-DBP complex i.e., the di-butyl phosphate entity and thereby easily bring the uranium ions into solution. However, the progress of dissolution in the case of 0.1% Na2-EDTA in the presence and absence of H2O2 was surprising. The percentage dissolution obtained in the presence of H2O2 was almost four times less than that obtained in the absence of H2O2. In the presence of H2O2, there is the possibility of the following reactions occurring simultaneously and the kinetics of dissolution is the resultant of these individual reactions, viz.,
i
Self decomposition of H2O2
ii
Interaction of H2O2 with DBP, an organic entity in U-DBP
iii
Oxidation of the potential chelating agent, EDTA in its di-sodium salt by H2O2
iv
Complex formation of U with EDTA
In the initial 20 min, the rate of dissolution is higher in the presence of H2O2 and the metal ion concentration in the solution is more than that observed in the absence of H2O2. After, 20 min, the uranium concentration in solution decreased. There is a possibility that the chelating agent, which is complexed with uranium is decomposed by H2O2. These uncomplexed uranium ions precipitate out in the absence of chelating agent resulting in the decrease of the concentration of dissolved uranium ions. This is also supported by the experimental observation that the clear solution turning slightly hazy as the experiment progressed.
On increasing the concentration of Na2-EDTA to 1%, the rate of dissolution increased and also higher percentage of uranium was brought into solution. A five-fold increase in the dissolution obtained when compared to 0.04% acid EDTA. On addition of 0.1% H2O2 to 1% Na2-EDTA there was slight increase in the rate of dissolution but not that prominent. But, on addition of 1% H2O2, there was significant increase in the dissolution rate and at the end of the experiment around 90% uranium from U-DBP was brought into the solution. Thus, the optimum concentration of the reactants for the resultant kinetics to be high was 1% each of Na2-EDTA and H2O2.
4.2. Sodium carbonate based formulations
Na2CO3 is one of the reagents used in the extraction of uranium from its ores and in the dissolution of oxides of uranium. During this process, uranium dissolves as its carbonate. Generally, carbonate salts and complexes are insoluble, with few important exceptions like ammonium carbonate, alkali metal carbonates and uranyl carbonate. It is reported that uranium in its +6 oxidation state readily dissolves in carbonate solution according to the reaction represented in the equation (9) (Shamsuddin, 2016, Gupta and Mukherjee, 1990). Hence, Na2CO3 was explored for the dissolution of U-DBP deposits.
(9)
Fig. 3 gives the dissolution of U-DBP in various Na2CO3 based formulations as a function of time and Table 2 gives the percentage dissolution realized after 1 h and the rate constants calculated from the cubic rate law equation (7). Investigations were also carried out at elevated temperatures viz., 50 and 65 °C to understand the influence of temperature on the kinetics of dissolution.
Fig. 3. Dissolution of U-DBP as a function of time in Na2CO3 based formulations.
Table 2. Dissolution of U-DBP in Na2CO3 based formulations.
Results given in the above table and Fig. 3 shows that the process of dissolution is dependent on the concentration of Na2CO3, pH of the formulation and temperature. The percentage dissolution and the rate of dissolution increased on increasing the concentration of Na2CO3 from 0.1% to 1%. Though, the rate of dissolution for 1% Na2CO3 formulation was 1.8 times that observed for 0.5% solution, there is not much difference in the overall percentage dissolution, which is greater than 90% that is achieved within the initial 20 min of the dissolution process (Fig. 3). Thus, 0.5% Na2CO3 solution is sufficient enough to dissolve 500 mg of U-DBP in reasonable time.
Addition of H2O2 to Na2CO3 did not favor the dissolution process as seen in the case of Na2-EDTA. The final pH in the case of formulation containing 1% Na2CO3 and 1% H2O2 went down to 5.8 and the percentage dissolution decreased from ∼91 to 79%. Similar decrease in the percentage dissolution was observed in the formulation containing 0.1% Na2CO3 and 0.1% H2O2 and there was decrease in the pH from 10.5 to 9.9. From the observations, it can be concluded a solution of 0.5% Na2CO3 alone is quite effective in dissolving U-DBP deposits.
4.2.1. Effect temperature
Analyzing the results given in Table 1, Table 2, it can be seen that of all the formulations evaluated and considering the practical difficulties in handling H2O2 and its effect on the structural materials, Na2CO3 at 35 °C is a superior formulation for dissolving U-DBP. To further enhance the kinetics of the dissolution process, experiments were carried out at higher temperatures (50 and 65 °C). The rate of dissolution at 35, 50 and 65 °C obtained were 1.0 × 10−2, 1.3 × 10−2 and 1.4 × 10−2 min−1 (Table 2) respectively. Fig. 4 gives the Arrhenius plot (log k Vs 1/T), from which the activation energy (ΔE) was calculated and it was found to be 8.3 kJ mol-1. The activation energy for the reaction is quite low, which is reflected in the less dependence of dissolution process on the temperature.
Fig. 4. Arrhenius plot of Log k Vs 1/T for the dissolution of U-DBP in 0.1% Na2CO3.
From the discussions, it is seen that the dissolution of U-DBP in the formulations viz., Na2-EDTA/Na2CO3 is a simple, single step process carried out at low temperatures. They are quite effective in dissolving U-DBP. Under the experimental conditions, more than 90% dissolution was achieved in reasonably less time.
5. Conclusions
Of the formulations evaluated for the dissolution of U-DBP, 0.5% Na2CO3 and mixture containing 1% Na2-EDTA and 1% H2O2 were found to yield more than 90% dissolution within 20 min of the process. However, in the case of Na2-EDTA formulation, there is requirement for the addition of H2O2; without H2O2 the % dissolution obtained is only around 70.
With H2O2 as one of the formulation constituents, there will be practical difficulties in handling the formulation. Mixture of H2O2 and metal ions like Fe2+/Fe3+, popularly known as Fenton's reagent is a good oxidant for the oxidation of organic compounds. The Fenton's oxidation is a free radical based rapid exothermic reaction, which needs to be monitored closely. Na2CO3 do not pose that kind of practical difficulties.
H2O2 being an oxidizing agent, there will be corrosive effect on the structural materials that need to be treated to remove the U-DBP deposits. Based on these undesirable effects of H2O2, Na2CO3 is the best option for the dissolution of U-DBP. Once the deposit is dissolved from the surfaces and removed from the system, the risk to the operating and maintenance personal due to radiation exposure will be minimized. Furthermore, the solution containing precious heavy metal can be later processed to recover uranium.
Acknowledgment
The authors are grateful to Dr. B. Prabhakara Reddy, PPSS, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam, India for providing U3O8, Dr. P. Chandramohan and Shri. V. S. Sathyaseelan, WSCD, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre Facilities, Kalpakkam, India for extending analytical support.
