<title>Uranium recovery from liquid cadmium separated from the molten salt used in electrorefining</title>
<author>Junhyuk Jang; Tackjin Kim; Hee-Chul Eun; Gha-Young Kim; Sungjai Lee</author>
<Affiliation>Pyroprocess Technology Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Yuseong-gu, Republic of Korea; University of Science and Technology, Yuseong-gu, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-018-6183-8</DOI>
<URL>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-018-6183-8?utm_source=cnki&utm_medium=affiliate&utm_content=meta&utm_campaign=DDCN_1_GL01_metadata</URL>
Abstract
A test was conducted to separate Cd from Cd/LiCl–KCl salt using a stainless steel basket with holes 0.5 mm in size. A thermal cycle test of Cd in the mesh basket was repeated 15 times to confirm the containment property. U was recovered from a bare Cd–U alloy via distillation at a low temperature of around 400–500 °C in a morphology of porous particles, showing no evidence for the bumping of the Cd–U alloy. The U recovery efficiency at a kg-scale reached 100%.
Introduction
Electrorefining is one of the most important pyroprocessing techniques for recovering U/TRU from spent fuel [1, 2]. In this process, the spent fuel is dissolved in a molten LiCl–KCl eutectic salt via electrolysis before the U is selectively deposited onto the surface of a cathode electrode [3,4,5,6]. Then, the U/TRU elements remaining in the eutectic salt are electrochemically recovered by a liquid cadmium cathode (LCC) [6,7,8]. Since the U/TRU is dissolved in a large amount of Cd, the Cd must be removed to collect pure U/TRU alloy.
The Cd, which is covered with LiCl–KCl salt after recovery by the LCC, is typically removed from the U/TRU using different vapor pressures as the Cd and salt have much higher vapor pressures than the U/TRU [9, 10]. This is generally how Cd distillation functions in pyroprocessing. The bumping of Cd, which may contribute to the loss of U/TRU, is a problem in Cd distillation. That is, the Cd evaporates before the salts covering the surface of the Cd because the Cd has a higher vapor pressure [11, 12]. The evaporated Cd gas may be blocked by the liquid salt, and this may contribute to the bumping of the Cd. The authors have previously studied the distillation behavior of Cd for U recovery at various temperatures and heating rates, and confirmed that some U is removed from the crucible [11]. The results suggest that if the liquid salt covering the evaporation interface is separated from the liquid Cd before distillation, this will significantly reduce the loss of U/TRU during distillation.
It is well known that Cd in a liquid phase has a high surface tension [13,14,15], and small particles easily agglomerate into a spherical morphology. Thus, liquid Cd has difficulty diffusing out from a mesh basket made of stainless steel. The authors have synthesized UCl3 via a reaction between U and CdCl2 (Eq. 1), leaving behind Cd in liquid phase [16]. Upon inspection, it was noted that most of the liquid Cd was retained in a mesh basket that contained U pellets. These results suggest the potential for separating Cd from Cd/LiCl–KCl using the difference in the surface tension, as shown in Table 1, i.e., Cd is possibly retained in a mesh-type metal basket while the LiCl–KCl salt diffuses through. Thus, it is likely that bare Cd without a LiCl–KCl salt layer can be removed at a very low distillation temperature of around 500 °C, and may potentially contribute to reducing the loss of U/TRU during the distillation process. To determine if this is indeed the case, it is important to study the possibility of separating the Cd from the salt, and then the corresponding distillation behavior for U/TRU recovery.
Table 1 Material properties of Cd, LiCl, KCl, and LiCl–KCl eutectic salt
Full size table
U+1.5CdCl2=UCl3+1.5Cd (ΔG=−281.7 kJ).
(1)
The objective of this study is to examine the possibility of separating Cd from Cd/LiCl–KCl using a mesh basket, and to evaluate the recovery efficiency of U/TRU from bare Cd via distillation at a low temperature of around 500 °C. The separation behavior of Cd from LiCl–KCl salt was first examined using a stainless steel mesh basket. The Cd and LiCl–KCl salt were placed into the mesh basket and heated to 500 °C above the melting temperature of both materials (the melting temperatures of the Cd and LiCl–KCl eutectic salt were 320.9 and 361 °C [17], respectively). The separation behavior of the Cd was evaluated based on the difference in weight before and after the test. The recovery of U/TRU from bare Cd was next examined via a Cd distillation test.
In this study, U was used as a surrogate for U/TRU. The U was chemically dissolved into liquid Cd, and the Cd–U alloy was distilled at a temperature of approximately 500 °C. The weight change was measured in order to observe the evaporation behavior of Cd from the alloy. The efficiency for the U recovery was calculated based on the change in the weight before and after the distillation test. The efficiency was confirmed at the kg-scale by using more than 2.6 kg of Cd–U alloy. Based on the results of these tests, the proposed method for U recovery was shown to be effective.
Experimental
Sample preparation
Cd shots (> 99.95% purity, Alfa Aesar, A Johnson Matthey Company) and coarse powder (0.3–1.5 mm, > 99% purity, Alfa Aesar, A Johnson Matthey Company) were used for the separation and distillation tests. LiCl–KCl eutectic salt (Alfa Aesar, A Johnson Matthey Company) with a purity higher than 99.9% was dried at 500 °C under vacuum before use. The Cd–U alloy was chemically synthesized as a surrogate for Cd/U/TRU alloy. The U was dissolved in Cd by immersing depleted U (DU) rods into a pool of Cd. DU cubes were prepared from DU cask materials for testing purposes. About 47 g of Cd was loaded into a crucible (30 mm ID × 35 mm H) and heated to 500 °C under atmospheric pressure. The DU rod was immersed into the liquid Cd for more than 10 h. Then, the furnace was cooled to room temperature after the DU rod was removed from the liquid Cd.
Separation test
About 16 g of Cd and 13 g of LiCl–KCl salt were placed into a metal basket (20 mm ID × 35 mm H) consisting of Tyler 32 mesh (the holes in the mesh were about 1.0 × 0.5 mm in size). The basket was placed in an alumina crucible (72 mm ID × 45 mm H) to capture the salt diffusing out of the mesh basket. The assembly was inserted into a furnace connected to a glove box in an Ar atmosphere (O2 < 10 ppm, H2O < 1 ppm), and heated to 500 °C at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. The temperature in the furnace was maintained for more than 5 h before it was cooled to room temperature. To examine the repetitive containment properties of liquid Cd using the mesh basket, about 200 g of Cd was loaded into a mesh basket (80 mm ID × 50 mm H). The basket was inserted into a furnace and heated up to 500 °C at the same heating rate as before. The temperature in the furnace was maintained constant for more than 3 h before dropping to room temperature. This thermal cycle was repeated a total of 15 times, and the Cd in the basket was observed after the test.
Distillation test
The distillation test was carried out in a laboratory-scale temperature gravimetric analyzer. The details of the apparatus can be found in the literature [11, 12]. The apparatus was composed of a glove box system connected to a two-zone tube furnace. The glove box was filled with Ar gas, and the atmosphere (O2 < 20 ppm, H2O < 5 ppm) was maintained during the test. A load cell was installed at the top flange of the two-zone furnace to measure the weight change of the sample during the test. Bare Cd–U alloy was loaded into the crucible (40 mm ID × 40 mm H) and the crucible was hung under the load cell. The furnace was evacuated using a rotary pump (the pressure was below 100 mTorr), and the crucible was heated to the target temperature, which was below 430 °C, at a heating rate of 2 °C min−1. The temperature was maintained constant for 100–300 min before dropping to room temperature after the test. The weight changes were measured by the load cell and recorded on a computer.
Calculation of the mass balance
The mass balance of the Cd, LiCl–KCl salt, and U was estimated based on the measured weight before and after each test. Since only the LiCl–KCl dissolved into the water, the salt was removed by washing with water in a mixture of Cd and salt before the weight of the Cd was measured.
Characterization
The crystal structure of the samples was characterized with a multi-purpose attachment X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (BRUKER, D8 ADVANCE) using a Cu Kα source. The morphology was observed with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi, S-8010) in conjunction with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Horiba, EX-250 X-max). The product after distillation was dissolved in concentrated HCl and HNO3 on a hot plate at 200 °C. Then, the composition was analyzed via an inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) (ACTIVA M, Horiba Jobin–Yvon SAS).
Results and discussion
Cd separation test from a mixture of Cd/LiCl–KCl salt
The separation properties of Cd from a mixture of Cd and LiCl–KCl salt using a mesh basket were evaluated. The Cd and salt were placed in the basket for the test, as shown in Fig. 1. A mesh basket (20 mm ID × 35 mm H) fabricated with Tyler 32 mesh was used for the separation test (Fig. 1a). About 16 g of Cd was loaded into the metal basket together with about 13 g of salt (Fig. 1b) and the mixture was heated to 500 °C, which was above the melting temperatures of both materials. After the test, almost all of the Cd (> 97.9% of the loaded Cd) remained in the basket (Fig. 1c), and the salt that drained from the basket collected in the crucible beneath (Fig. 1d). The negligible amount of Cd that was lost in the process was attributed to the Cd oxide in the powder contained in the Cd samples as this powder was fine enough to penetrate the tight mesh (black particles can be seen floating on the surface of the salt in Fig. 1d). The results indicate that the Cd was successfully separated from the Cd/salt mixture.
Fig. 1
figure1
Photos before (a, b) and after (c, d) the separation test of Cd from Cd/LiCl–KCl; a a mesh basket (Tyler 32 mesh), b Cd and LiCl–KCl loaded in the basket, c Cd remains in the basket, and d LiCl–KCl salt separated after the test
A thermal cycle test was conducted using a metal basket to confirm the containment properties of Cd. About 200 g of Cd (coarse powder) was loaded into a mesh basket and heated to 500 °C, which is above the melting temperature of the Cd. Then, the basket was cooled down to room temperature in the furnace. This thermal cycle was repeated a total of 15 times. A mesh basket (72 mm ID × 45 mm H) with the same mesh as in the previous test was used for the test, and a metal crucible was located beneath the basket (Fig. 2a). The liquid Cd that remained in the basket after the repetitive melting test is shown in Figs. 2b–d. The Cd particles floated above the liquid Cd in the mesh basket (Fig. 2b); however, most of the Cd melted and remained in the basket (Fig. 2c, d). The floated particles were thought to consist of Cd oxide contamination that was introduced while in storage in the laboratory. A very small amount of Cd in powder form (yellow color) was observed in the metal crucible located beneath the mesh basket after the test (Fig. 2e), and it was thought that the Cd powder dropped through the mesh at the bottom of the mesh basket. The results show that the liquid-phase Cd was not able to penetrate the mesh basket even after 15 thermal cycles, which confirms the reproducibility of the containment properties of the liquid Cd in a mesh basket.
Fig. 2
figure2
Photos after thermal cycle test; a system configuration for mesh basket and metal crucible, b top-view, c bottom-view, d side-view of Cd melts in the mesh basket, and e metal crucible
U recovery test from bare Cd–U alloy
A U recovery test was conducted in vacuum from Cd–U alloy without LiCl–KCl salt to simulate the cathode process in the pyroprocessing. The fundamental evaporation behavior of pure Cd in a vacuum has been reported in the literature [11]. In those results, the Cd began to evaporate above 350 °C, and evaporated rapidly above 400 °C at pressures below 0.05 Torr. Based on that report, the distillation temperature in the current study was 400 °C. The weight change of the Cd–U alloy during the distillation test is shown in Fig. 3. The evaporation of Cd from the Cd–U alloy was first confirmed via the distillation test, which was conducted at 400 °C for 100 min (Fig. 3a). The weight of the Cd–U alloy decreased with time, which indicates that the Cd was successfully removed by the test. The magnitude of the weight decrease recorded by the load cell was about 21.7 g. All of the Cd remaining after the first test was removed by the second distillation test, which lasted for 300 min at the same temperature (Fig. 3b). The weight of the Cd–U alloy rapidly decreased for about 100 min after the temperature reached 400 °C. The weight gradually decreased for about 200 min after the distillation began. The weight decrease was recorded as 24.9 g. The total amount of the weight decease from first and second distillation test was about 46.6 g which was close to the amount of Cd in the Cd–U alloy. It was thought that the Cd in the Cd–U alloy was completely removed after the second test, and the small weight difference of Cd between the loaded and evaporated Cd, which was about 0.4 g, was due to the evaporation of the Cd during the fabrication of the Cd–U alloy. The remainder was heated to about 1200 °C (i.e., above the melting temperature of U, i.e., 1132.2 °C), in order to melt the U used to simulate the cathode process during the pyroprocessing [18]. During heating, no further weight decrease was observed, which confirms that the Cd in the Cd–U alloy was removed completely after the second distillation test.
Fig. 3
figure3
Temperature and weight change of U–Cd alloy as a function of time for a 1st distillation, b 2nd distillation, and c consolidation
The macroscopic morphologies during the U recovery test are shown in Fig. 4, and Fig. 4a shows the Cd–U alloy before the distillation test. As the surface of the alloy was partially dark black in color, it was considered that a small amount of U was contaminated as U oxide during the fabrication process, and the contamination floated over the surface of the alloy. The surface morphology after the first distillation test is shown in Fig. 4b. The level of the alloy in the crucible became lower during the test due to the Cd in the alloy that was removed during the distillation process. The Cd–U alloy transitioned to fine particles after all of the Cd was removed from the alloy and left behind the U (Fig. 4c). The particles ranged in size from several micrometers to millimeters. No evidence of bumping was observed in the Cd–U alloy after the distillation test. This was thought to be because the Cd in the bare Cd–U alloy without LiCl–KCl salt evaporated without bumping the alloy at the low distillation temperature of 400 °C [19]. The U particles were successfully consolidated after the heating test above the melting temperature of U (Fig. 4d)), simulating the cathode process in the pyroprocessing.
Fig. 4
figure4
Macroscopic morphologies of Cd–U alloy a before and b–d after the distillation for U recovery; a before test, after b 1st distillation, c 2nd distillation, and d consolidation
Table 2 lists the mass balance of the Cd and U after the distillation test. The weight of the U dissolved in the Cd was estimated via the weight changes of the U ingot before and after fabricating the Cd–U alloy. About 2 wt% U was dissolved in the Cd pool at a temperature of 500 °C, and the results were consistent with the solubility of U in Cd as previously reported [20]. The efficiency of the U recovery was estimated to be 94.2% as the weight loss during the test totaled only 0.09 g (Table 2). Since the amount of U dissolved in the Cd was not large, the very small amount of weight loss was still enough to contribute to a decrease in the efficiency. The weight loss was attributed to measurement errors or mass loss during the complicated process of fabricating the Cd–U alloy as there was no evidence for bumping of the Cd–U alloy during the U recovery test.
Table 2 Weight changes before and after the distillation test
Characterization
Considering conventional cathode processing, which occurs at temperatures above 1200 °C [9], it is interesting to note that the U was recovered after the distillation of Cd with Cd–U alloy at the mild temperature of 400 °C. For this reason, the structure of the U recovered after Cd removal was characterized (Fig. 4c). Another distillation test was conducted at a temperature of 400 °C to confirm the reproducibility of the results, and powder products were successfully obtained that were similar to those shown in Fig. 4c although these are not shown here. The morphology of the particles observed via SEM are shown in Fig. 5, and it can be seen that the particles had a porous surface structure (Fig. 5a) and an irregular sponge-like morphology (Fig. 5b). This sponge-like structure consisted of groups of particles (Fig. 5c). Figure 5d shows the EDS spectra obtained from the area in Fig. 5b, and it can be seen that the structure was mostly U as no Cd remained. It was surmised that the UCd11 particles first formed as the Cd was removed from the Cd–U alloy by the distillation process. Then, as more Cd was removed from the UCd11 particles, the sponge-like morphology remained.
Fig. 5
figure5
Microscopic surface morphology and corresponding EDS spectra for the particles after distillation
The crystal structure of the particles was observed by via XRD analysis. The XRD pattern is shown in Fig. 6, and confirms that the particles consisted of U in metallic form. Here, no patterns for Cd were observed, which confirmed the result of the SEM–EDS. The results of a chemical analysis were consistent with the XRD results. Table 3 shows the chemical composition of the particles as determined by the ICP. The particles were mostly U, and only a very small amount of Cd was observed. The negligible small amount of Cd remaining was attributed to the Cd oxide from the Cd shot used in the test.
Fig. 6
figure6
XRD pattern for the remains after distillation
Table 3 Chemical composition of remains after the distillation test
The characterization results indicated that the U was successfully recovered in metallic powder form from the Cd–U alloy after the Cd was removed at the low temperature of 400 °C in vacuum.
U recovery test in a kg-scale
It was found that the U was successfully recovered in a metallic form via distillation at a low temperature of around 400 °C. However, the batch size of approximately 50 g of Cd was not enough to evaluate the efficiency of the U recovery from the Cd–U alloy. Thus, a U recovery test was conducted at a kg-scale.
Figure 7 shows the materials before and after the distillation test. About 2.6 kg of Cd was melted in a stainless steel basket (90 mm OD × 90 mm H) (Fig. 7a), and 62.9 g of U (Fig. 7b) was immersed in the Cd after melting at 500 °C, as was described in the experimental section. The Cd–U alloy in a kg-scale was fabricated as shown in Fig. 7c. The Cd–U alloy was distilled at a temperature of approximately 500 °C. Considering the amount of Cd, the distillation temperature was increased enough to ensure a sufficient evaporation rate. After the distillation test, about 63.6 g of powder remained (Fig. 7d). About 0.7 g (≈ 1%) of weight was gained after the test, indicating that all of the U that was dissolved in the Cd pool remained. We thus consider that the efficiency for the U recovery at a kg-scale was reached almost 100%. The negligible weight gain that was observed was attributed to Cd oxide contamination from the Cd used to fabricate the Cd–U alloy. No evidence of U loss due to bumping of the Cd–U alloy was observed, and the basket exhibited a very clean inside surface. The characterization results showed that the remaining material consisted of metallic U, a result that is similar to the above results, although these are not shown.
Fig. 7
figure7
Photos a–c before and d after U recovery test at a kg-scale; a Cd pool, b U ingot, c Cd–U alloy, and d remains after the recovery test
Based on the results, the Cd–U alloy in liquid phase can be separated from LiCl–KCl salt using a mesh basket after the electrorefining in the pyroprocessing. In addition, U can be recovered from Cd–U alloy without loss during Cd distillation at a relatively low temperature of around 400–500 °C. The cathode process under these mild conditions has significant advantages in terms of the equipment design, including the selection of crucible materials. Thus, in future work, a new cathode process will be designed at a kg-scale that will support the separation of U–Cd alloy and its distillation a low temperatures.
Conclusions
In this paper, the possibility of Cd separation from LiCl–KCl salt using a mesh basket was investigated, as was the recovery efficiency of U from bare Cd–U alloy via distillation at a low temperature of around 400–500 °C. The following conclusions can be drawn from the results of this work:
Cd was successfully separated from a Cd/salt mixture using a mesh basket with 0.5 mm holes at a temperature of 500 °C. During the tests, the Cd remained in the basket while the salt drained out of the basket.
A thermal cycle test of Cd in the mesh basket was conducted to confirm its containment properties.
U was recovered from bare Cd–U alloy at a low temperature of 400 °C in a morphology of porous particles, and exhibited no evidence for the bumping of the Cd–U alloy.
A U recovery test from Cd–U alloy at a kg-scale confirmed a high efficiency of 100% was achieved.
Based on the results, it is clear that the Cd–U alloy in a liquid phase can be separated from Cd–U/LiCl–KCl using a mesh basket after the electrorefining in pyroprocessing, and the U can be recovered from the Cd–U alloy without its loss during Cd distillation at a mild temperature of around 400–500 °C.
