<title>Am, Cm recovery from genuine HLLW by extraction chromatography</title>
<author>Sou Watanabe; Yuichi Sano; Hirohide Kofuji; Masayuki Takeuchi; Atsuhiro Shibata; Kazunori Nomura</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Fuel Cycle Engineering Laboratories, Japan Atomic Energy Agency</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-018-5853-x</DOI>
<URL>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-018-5853-x?utm_source=cnki&utm_medium=affiliate&utm_content=meta&utm_campaign=DDCN_1_GL01_metadata</URL>
Abstract
The extraction chromatography experiments for Am(III) and Cm(III) recovery from genuine HLLW were carried out in order to demonstrate modified 2 flow-sheets using CMPO/SiO2-P and HDEHP/SiO2-P adsorbents for obtaining DTPA-free MA(III) product solution. The first flow-sheet achieved about 90% MA(III) recovery with more than 103 of decontamination factor for 155Eu. However, further modification is necessary for separation of light lanthanides. Purification of MA(III) from both of heavy and light lanthanides was successfully done by the 2nd flow-sheet although recovery yields of MA(III) was almost the same with the current flow-sheet i.e. 70%. The recovery yield is expected to be improved by some optimizations in operation conditions such as column length, flow rate of the mobile phase and etc.
Introduction
Partitioning and transmutation of long lived fission products in the spent nuclear fuel is one of the most important strategies for reducing amount and radiotoxicity of the vitrified waste. Separation of trivalent minor actinide (MA(III): Am(III) and Cm(III)) is the most-watched technology due to its difficulty lead by chemical similarity with trivalent lanthanides (Ln(III)). Japan Atomic Energy Agency has been proposing the extraction chromatography technology as the promising method to recover MA(III) from high level liquid waste (HLLW) generated in the reprocessing, and our group is conducting a series of researches for practical application of the technology [1,2,3]. In this technology, porous silica based adsorbents are used for MA(III) recovery, and various extractants which can interact with MA(III) are utilized by impregnating into porous silica support (referred as SiO2-P).
Based on series of fundamental studies, two steps column operation procedure using octyl(phenyl)-N,N-diisobutylcarbonoylmethylphosphine oxide (CMPO) [4] and bis(2-ethylhexyl) hydrogen phosphate (HDEHP) [5] as the extractants for the 1st and 2nd columns, respectively, was proposed as one of the promising flow-sheets for the MA(III) recovery [6]. In the flow-sheet, MA(III) + Ln(III) co-recovery from the HLLW was expected in the CMPO/SiO2-P column operation, and then selective stripping of MA(III) from MA(III) and Ln(III) charged HDEHP/SiO2-P column by Diethylene triamine penta acetic acid (DTPA) eluent was targeted. Performance of the flow-sheets was evaluated by column separation experiments on genuine HLLW in our previous study [7]. Although selective recovery of MA(III) was successfully accomplished with more than 103 of the decontamination factor (DF), recovery yields of MA(III) was about 70% which was smaller than our target value; 99%. Slow elution kinetics of MA(III) from the 2nd column by the DTPA eluent was considered to be one of the main reasons of the mediocre performance. In order to enhance the recovery yield of MA(III) with keeping the high DF of Ln(III), larger volume of the DTPA solution has to be supplied into the 2nd column or the residual MA(III) are necessary to be treated again after discharged from the column. Those improvements on the current flow-sheet not only are inefficient but also will result in large amount of DTPA reagent existing in the MA(III) product solution.
Microwave denitration experiments on simulated product solution containing the DTPA showed that some part of carbon originated from the DTPA remained in product powder as inorganic compounds [8]. Those carbon impurities are suspected to influence on characteristics of MA(III) bearing fuel, therefore DTPA in the MA(III) product solution is desirable to be removed before the denitration process or the MA(III) recovery flow-sheet has to be improved to give DTPA-free MA(III) product solution.
In this study, two types of modifications in the current flow-sheet employing CMPO/SiO2-P and HDEHP/SiO2-P adsorbents were proposed to achieve more efficient MA(III) recovery and to produce DTPA-free MA(III) product solution, and performances of the modified flow-sheets were experimentally evaluated through column separation operations on the genuine HLLW.
Experimental
Adsorbents were prepared by impregnating CMPO or HDEHP into SiO2-P support, where the detail procedure is described in Ref. [9]. HLLW was obtained by dissolution with nitric acid and modified PUREX operation on “Joyo” irradiated fuel [10]. The original and modified operational conditions are shown in Table 1, and compositions of the feed solution for those experiments are shown in Table 2, where concentrations of the radioactive nuclides and Nd were analyzed by γ or α radioactivity and by ICP-AES, respectively.
Table 1 Experimental conditions of the column separation operations
Table 2 Compositions of the feed solutions for the 1st columns
In the modification No. 1, MA(III) and Ln(III) were stripped by H2O from the 1st column, and the intermediate product was supplied to the 2nd column after adjusting acidity with [HNO3] = 0.2 M. In these conditions, removal of heavy Ln(III) (hLn(III); Sm–Lu, Y) from MA(III) product solution is expected to be achieved through the 2nd column by adsorption of hLn(III) with discharging MA(III) from the column. However, light Ln(III) (lLn(III); La-Pr) may mix in MA(III) product solution because lLn(III) behave like MA(III) against HDEHP at the acidity region [11]. Nevertheless, the modification brings DTPA-free MA(III) solution with simpler process than the original one, and large throughput with less volume of eluent is expected. In addition, radiation damage of the HDEHP/SiO2-P adsorbent would be drastically decreased since the α-emitting nuclides are not adsorbed. In this experiment, 3 wash solutions were supplied into the column to evaluate elution behavior of adsorbed cations.
Experimental conditions of both columns were changed in the modification No. 2. Eluent for the 1st CMPO/SiO2-P column was changed from H2O to DTPA solution to remove lLn(III) from the interim product by this column. According to our previous solvent extraction experiments of the SETFICS process, MA(III) + hLn(III) are expected to be eluted from the column before lLn(III) elution [12]. The removal of lLn(III) must be possible if appropriate fractions of the effluent involving only MA(III) and hLn(III) are selected as the feed solution for the 2nd column. After adjusting acidity of the interim product solution to be [HNO3] = 0.3 M by adding HNO3 to prevent from precipitation of DTPA, the solution was supplied to the 2nd column. Both hLn(III) and lLn(III) in DTPA solution with this acidity was shown to be adsorbed into HDEHP/SiO2-P adsorbent by our preliminary experiments. Eluent of the 2nd column was changed from DTPA solution to 1 M nitric acid solution. MA(III) charged in the HDEHP/SiO2-P adsorbent is expected to be eluted faster than hLn(III) based on our previous experiments [6, 7]. Eventually, MA(III) product solution without DTPA and hLn(III) can be obtained.
Column separation experiments were carried out in a hot cell of Chemical Processing Facility (CPF) of Japan Atomic Energy Agency. Adsorbents were packed in metallic columns with 3 cmID and 32.5 cmH (1 Bed Volume (BV) = 230 cm3). During the experiments, temperature inside the column was controlled by supplying cooling water into jackets of the columns. Solutions shown in the Table 1 were sequentially supplied into the columns with linear velocity of 4 cm/min, then effluents from the columns were fractionally collected at every 1 BV. Concentrations of the representative nuclides and Nd in the fractions were analyzed by γ or α radioactivity and by ICP-AES, respectively. Decontamination factor (DF) of fission products were calculated by
DF=CM,FVF∑ni=mCM,iVi
where CM,i and CM,F are the concentration of M in i-th fraction and feed solution, respectively, and V i and VF are volumes of i-th fraction and the feed solution, respectively.
Results and discussion
Modification No. 1
Elution curves of representative nuclides from the 1st column are shown in Fig. 1a, where C0 and C are the concentrations in the feed solution and the effluent, respectively. As seen in the previous report, 137Cs was not adsorbed by the 1st column and discharged with the feed solution. MA(III) and 155Eu were adsorbed by CMPO/SiO2-P and properly eluted from the column with H2O effluent. These features also followed the results of the previous experiments. The recovery yields of MA(III) in the interim product solution were more than 99%, and all supplied 155Eu was mixed in the product solution. The product solution was supplied into the 2nd column after adjusting the acidity to 0.2 M.
Fig. 1
figure1
Elution curves obtained by column separation experiments of the modified flow-sheet No. 1. a Elution curves of CMPO/SiO2-P column, b Elution curves of HDEHP/SiO2-P column. MA + Ln product solution from CMPO/SiO2-P column was supplied to HDEHP/SiO2-P column as the feed solution
Elution curves of the HDEHP/SiO2-P column is shown in Fig. 1b. Most part of MA(III) supplied into the 2nd column was not adsorbed by HDEHP/SiO2-P and discharged with the feed solution while 155Eu was adsorbed by the column as expected. Consequently, about 90% of MA(III) was obtained with DF > 103 for 155Eu. Residual MA(III) was discharged from the column by the 1 M HNO3 wash solution. Procedure of the DTPA wash solution can be omitted because no elements eluted in these fractions. Comparing to our previous results, recovery yields of MA(III) obtained by this study was significantly improved by 20%. However, lLn(III) are suspected to be discharged with MA(III) from HDEHP/SiO2-P column at this acidity region. Although concentrations of 144Ce and 144Pr in the feed solution were below the detectable limit (i.e. 3.7 × 102 Bq/mL), those nuclides are also desirable to be decontaminated. ICP analysis on feed solution and final MA(III) product solution revealed that most part of Nd in the feed solution accompanied with MA(III) and remained in the product solution. Distribution coefficients of MA(III) and Nd(III) on the HDEHP extractant show slight difference in this acidity region [11], therefore refinement in the acidity of the feed solution for the 2nd column might achieve lLn(III) removal from the final product solution by this column.
Modification No. 2
Elution curves of the CMPO/SiO2-P column are shown in Fig. 2a. MA(III) and 155Eu eluted from the column faster than Nd elution. However, tails of MA(III) and 155Eu peaks overlapped with rise in the Nd elution, and complete separation could not be achieved by this study. Longer column length, slower flow rate of the mobile phase and/or smaller volume of the feed solution are expected to give better separation performance. In this study, the interim product solution volume was defined to be 3 BV after switching the mobile phase from the wash solution to the eluent as shown in the figure. About 90% of 241Am and 244Cm were recovered in the product solution with DF = 102 for Nd, while the recovery yields increased to be 94% and DF for Nd decreased to be 2 if more 1 BV of the fraction is added to the product. The range of the interim product was selected prioritizing decontamination of lLn(III) over MA(III) recovery yields.
Fig. 2
figure2
Elution curves obtained by column separation experiments of the modified flow-sheet No. 2. a Elution curves of CMPO/SiO2-P column, b Elution curves of HDEHP/SiO2-P column. MA + hLn product from CMPO/SiO2-P column was supplied to HDEHP/SiO2-P column as the feed solution after adjusting acidity to be [HNO3] = 0.3 M
The interim product solution was supplied into the 2nd HDEHP/SiO2-P column after adjusting the acidity to be 0.3 M. The elution curves are shown in Fig. 2b. After the mobile phase changed from the wash solution to the eluent, MA(III) were eluted in advance with 155Eu elution. Tails of the elution curves of MA(III) overlapped with 155Eu elution, and complete separation could not be achieved by this operation. Nevertheless, about 80% of MA(III) was recovered with DF = 7 × 102 for 155Eu in the MA product fractions shown in the figure, and further improvements in the performance might be accomplished by the same manner discussed in the previous paragraph. Nd in the feed solution accompanied with MA(III) and lLn(III) could not be decontaminated by this column, thus decontamination performance of lLn(III) and hLn(III) by this flow sheet can be concluded to be 102 and 7 × 102, respectively. Small amount of 137Cs in the feed solution was discharged from the column with the feed solution, therefore not only hLn(III) but also 137Cs was decontaminated by this condition. Decontamination factor by the 2nd column of 137Cs was 25, and consequently it becomes 105 by the 2 steps operation. Other fission products such as 90Sr, platinum group elements and etc. which do not show affinity to CMPO and HDEHP extractants should accompany with 137Cs and must be decontaminated with the similar performance. Mo and Zr which are extractable by those extractants can be excluded from the product solution by optimizing operational condition in the 1st CMPO/SiO2-P column since Mo and Zr should elute faster than hLn(III) from the column by the DTPA eluent [13].
Recovery yields of MA(III) in the product solutions and decontamination factors of representative fission products by 2 modified flow-sheets are summarized in Table 3. In the No. 1 modification, decontamination of radioactive nuclides was successfully done. Enhancement in MA(III) recovery from the 2nd column and removal of lLn(III) from the MA(III) product solution might be required tasks. Decontamination of fission products was excellent if about 70% of the recovery yields of MA(III), which was almost the same with that of the previous study, was acceptable in the modification No. 2. Although several improvements in these flow-sheets are necessary for practical use, DTPA-free MA(III) product solution was shown to be obtained with more efficient procedure than by the current flow-sheet using the DTPA eluent. As one of future works for the flow-sheet modification, optimization in the operation conditions in the modification No. 2 for better separation performances for Ln(III) in the 1st and 2nd column will be carried out soon, and behavior of fission products which were not evaluated in this study will also be investigated for the improved flow-sheet.
Table 3 Recovery yields (RY) of MA(III) and decontamination factors (DF) for representative FPs
Conclusions
Improvements in flow-sheet of the extraction chromatography technology using CMPO/SiO2-P and HDEHP/SiO2-P adsorbents for obtaining chelating reagent-free MA(III) product solution from high level liquid waste with more simple flow-sheet than the current one, and demonstration of the modified flow-sheets were carried out. Flow-sheet No. 1 succeeded in the improvement in simplification of the process, however light lanthanides mixed in the MA(III) product solution. All lanthanides could be separated from MA(III) with more simple process than the current one in the flow-sheet No. 2, however optimizations in operation conditions are required to achieve target recovery yields of MA(III). Owing to those results obtained by this study, a guideline to establish a practical flow-sheet for MA(III) recovery by the extraction chromatography technology was made, and further modification and demonstration of the flow-sheet will be carried out soon.
