<title>Thermodynamic parameters for the complexation of Tc(IV) with bromide under aqueous conditions</title>
<author>Cecilia Eiroa-Lledo; Donald E. Wall; Nathalie A. Wall</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Chemistry , Washington State University, Pullman , WA , 99164 , USA ; Nuclear Science Center , Washington State University, Pullman , WA , 99164 , USA</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiochimica Acta</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Walter de Gruyter GmbH</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1515/ract-2019-3135</DOI>
<URL>http://sci-hub.ren/10.1515/ract-2019-3135</URL>
Abstract:
Technetium-99 is a long-lived fission product present in nuclear wastes, found mainly as Tc(VII) and Tc(IV) in the environment. The quantification of the equilibrium constants for the formation of Tc(IV) aqueous complexes has been limited to carboxylate ligands
and interactions with the halides is mostly unknown.
This work reports equilibrium constants of the formation of the TcO(OH)+  complexes with Br−, in a 3 M NaClO4 solution of pcH 2 and varied temperature, using a liquidliquid extraction system. Neutron activation confirmed
the suitability of the extraction technique for this work.
Under the working conditions, Br− forms a weak exothermic TcO(OH)Br complex, with a Gibbs free energy (ΔGr
)of 3 ± 3 kJ · mol−1 at a temperature of 273.15 K. The values for ΔHr  (−32 ± 3 kJ · mol−1) and ΔSr  (106 ± 9 J · mol−1 · K−1) of the complexation reaction were quantified using a van’t Hoff analysis. This work also showed that bromide addition does not displace the hydroxide from TcO(OH)+
, as the equilibrium constant of bromide addition is much weaker than the first hydrolysis constant of the metal.
Keywords: Solvent extraction; technetium;bromine.
1 Introduction Technetium-99 is a long-lived (t1/2 = 2.13 · 105  years) mostly anthropogenic element, which accounts for approximately 6 % of the cumulative fission product yield of uranium and plutonium fission [1]. The long half-life combined with the large quantity of 99Tc produced by nuclear power plants makes this element an important contributor to the total activity in nuclear waste; Tc dominates spent nuclear fuel activity during the period 104 –106 years after fuel removal.
Technetium-99 is present in the environment, because of atmospheric testing and from accidental releases from nuclear waste repositories, as was observed at the Hanford site in Washington State, USA. Understanding the fundamental chemistry of technetium is essential for environmental remediation. Although Tc can adopt the +1, +3, +4,
+5 and +7 oxidation states, the tetravalent and heptavalent are the most common forms of Tc in the environment [2].
The chemistry of Tc(VII) has been studied in more depth than that of Tc(IV). The tetravalent state of 99Tc occurs under mild reducing conditions, as found in some soil or water systems. The literature reports thermodynamic data pertaining to the complexation of Tc(IV) with large polyamino-polycarboxylate ligands [3–5], and with small environmental ligands such as sulfate [6], citrate [7], carbonate[8] and oxalate [9]. Further data is needed for Tc(IV) complexation with small environmental ligands, readily available for complexation, such as the halides. Table 1 presents
halide concentrations in various ground water systemsnear active and proposed nuclear waste repositories.Bromide appears in most soils presented in Table 1, but there is limited data describing Br− interaction with Tc(IV) in aqueous systems. The majority of research concerning the interactions between Tc and Br has been limitedto complex formation for spectroscopic applications [16].The research focused on solid and crystal structure formation, mostly performed in non-aqueous media, focusing on the formation of complexes in the form of TcBr4
and TcBr6 2− [17–19]. These complexes have been obtained through electrochemical methods and in excess of halide at temperatures exceeding 400 °C [17, 18, 20]. Those compounds are known to undergo photochemical decomposition and hydrolysis [21]. This paper aims to quantify theequilibrium constant for the formation of Tc(IV) aqueous complexes with Br− and derive associated thermodynamic values.
2 Experimental
2.1 Technetium reduction
Deionized water (Millipore Synergy, 18.2 MΩ) was boiled for 30  min, then degassed with 99.995 % N2 beforepreparing solutions. Extractions were performed in an inert atmosphere glovebox (99.999 % N2) maintained at less than 8 ppm O2. Oxygen levels were measured by an Alpha-omega 3000 oxygen sensor. The Tc(IV) stock was prepared by the chemical reduction of a Tc(VII) solution, as previously described [4, 22, 23]. Briefly, 0.2 mCiNH4TcO4 (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) was added to1.5 mL of 0.2 M Na2S2O4(J. T. Baker). The pH of the solution was increased to pH 12 and the solution was left to
equilibrate for 72 h. A black precipitate appeared (TcO2)and extra NaOH was added to allow for maximum precipitation. The precipitate was then filtered and washed
three times with 0.1 M Na2S2O4. The clean precipitate was then dissolved in a 5 M HCl and 0.02 M hydrazine solution (98+ %, Sigma-Aldrich); this constitutes the final Tc(IV) stock solution, which is kept in the inert atmosphere glovebox. A new reduced Tc solution is prepared every 2 weeks.
The Tc stock solution concentration was measured using liquid scintillation counting (LSC) (Beckman LS 6500). The concentration of Tc(IV) was quantified using a liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) with 5.0  mM tetraphenylphosphonium chloride (Ph4
PCl) (98 %, Sigma-Aldrich)in chloroform, and 1 mM EDTA (99 %, Fisher) with a 10 μLspike of the Tc(IV) stock solution [23]. Only Tc(VII) (TcO4 −)is extracted into the organic phase by Ph4 PCl, leaving Tc(IV) in the aqueous phase. This extraction was performed at the beginning of every experiment.
2.2 pcH measurements
The pcH value is associated with the proton concentration, while the pH-electrode response refers to the proton
activity. Solution pcH values were quantified from the potentials measured with a Fisher Scientific Accument AB15 Basic pH meter with a Mettler-Toledo LE422 combination pH electrode. The electrode was calibrated daily to
quantify the relationship between pcH and the electrode potential, using pH calibration standards (pcH = 1, 1.5, 2.0,2.5) prepared with a 3 M H/NaClO4  ionic strength.
2.3 Liquid-liquid extractions
All materials and chemicals used were reagent grade. The samples were prepared in the inert atmosphere glovebox.
The organic phase (1.5  mL) consisted of 500  mM bis(2- ethylhexyl) phosphate (HDEHP) (Aldrich) in dodecane – the extractant HDEHP had been purified by a copper precipitation method prior to use [24]. The aqueous phas (1.5 mL) was made up of 20 μL of Tc(IV) stock, with an ioni strength maintained at 3  M with NaClO4  (99.9 %, Fisher)
at pcH 2.0, and a variable NaBr (99.99 %, Sigma-Aldrich) concentration (0–3 M). The glass vials were sealed (screw cap), wrapped in parafilm, and sealed in plastic bags. Thesample bags were removed from the glovebox and shaken in a temperature-controlled water bath (Grant OLS26  Aqua Pro) for 24 h–24 h was determined to be appropriate to reach equilibrium. The experiments were performed at 13, 18, 26, 28, 35, and 43 °C. The vials were then centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 3 min to ensure phase separation.
The samples were reintroduced in the glovebox, where a 1.0 mL aliquot from each phase was sampled and added to 4 mL of scintillation cocktail in LSC vials. The LSC vials were removed from the glovebox and counted for 10 min (or <5 % counting error) using a Beckman liquid scintillation counter.
2.4 Neutron activation experiments
Neutron activation experiments were performed at the Washington State University Nuclear Science Center. Three different solutions were irradiated using a 1.0 MW TRIGA reactor with a 1.03 · 1013 n · cm−1 · s−1 thermal neutron flux and 5.15 · 1011 n · cm−1 · s−1 epithermal neutron flux. Only the aqueous phases of the liquid-liquid extraction systems were irradiated. The contents of the irradiated solutions were as follow:
– Solution A – Background – aqueous solution of 3 M NaBr, 0  M Tc(IV). Not contacted with the organic phase.
– Solution B – aqueous solution of 3 M NaBr, 0 M Tc(IV).
Contacted with the dodecane, 0 mM HDEHP.
– Solution C – aqueous solution of 3 M NaBr and 1 · 10−7 M Tc(IV). Contacted with 200 mM HDEHP in dodecane.
All solutions were irradiated for 9 min while rotating and then cooled for 9  days. The isotope of interest was 82Br (t1/2 = 1.471 d), with a 776.52 keV gamma peak (83.4 %).
The samples were analyzed using a gamma spectrometer (Canberra, Genie 2000, version 3.2.1) with a live time of 180  min and a dead time of less than 5 %. The samples were counted several times for 1 day after cooling.
Table 1: Concentration (M) of halides in various water systems.
2.5 Data analysis
The speciation of Tc(IV) was calculated using Hyperquad Simulation Speciation Software (HYSS 4.0.31), using Tc(IV) hydrolysis constants presented in Table 2. Tetravalent Tc is present as TcO(OH)+ , under the experimental conditions discussed in this paper (pcH = 2.0), with less than 0.8 % present as TcO2+ . The equilibrium constant of the TcO(OH)+ complex with Br− was calculated from the data acquired from liquid-liquid extraction experiments.
Metal-ligand complexation reaction of TcO(OH)+ with Br−under these experimental conditions can be written as
follows:
@ (1)
The reaction equilibrium constant (K1) is defined as:
@ (2)
The metal distribution ratio, D, is the ratio between the metal concentration in the organic phase and that in the aqueous phase. The distribution ratio in absence of ligand, D0, is [26]:
@(3)
Upon inclusion of Br− in the system, the equation becomes:
@ (4)
The plot of (D0/D)–1 as a function of NaBr concentration provides a linear regression with a slope equal to the equilibrium constant (K1), if only one complex is generated (the 1: − 1:1 complex in the present case). Additional
Br complexes would lead to a polynomial trend, with the polynomial degree being equal to the number of ligands bound to the metal.
The equilibrium constants were determined at the different experimental temperatures and a modified van’t Hoff equation was used. This analysis relies on the relationship between the equilibrium constant and the Gibbs
free energy of a reaction:
@ (5)
where R is the gas constant, and T is the temperature of the system. Upon substitution in the fundamental equation for Gibbs free energy, the linear van’t Hoff equation
leads to the following equation:
@ (6)
This equation allows for the quantification of the enthalpy and entropy for the chemical equilibrium presented above, at a fixed temperature.
3 Results and discussion
Figure 1 presents the results obtained from the neutron activation analysis experiment, showing the post-irradiation activity of 82Br of each of the three test solutions
(A, B, and C). We observe an average of 1.2 % difference and 1.9 % difference between the total activity of solutions B and A, and solution C and A, respectively. These data are well within the error associated with the data scattering, which indicates that less than 2 % of 82Br migrated
to the organic phase in both the solution containing 99Tc (C) and the solution with no metal (B). Consequently, we conclude that there is no significant migration of bromide species into the organic phase for the liquid extractions performed under our experimental conditions.
Figure 2 presents the experimental data for Tc(IV) extraction in the presence of NaBr at 43, 28, and 18 °C (the data obtained at other temperatures are omitted for clarity). The linearity of the data points signifies the presence of one Tc(IV)/Br complex. Complex equilibrium constants are derived from the slope of the linear regression data, based on the hypothesis that the TcO(OH)
Br complex is formed. The equilibrium constants of the TcO(OH)Br complex formation at 13, 18, 26, 28, 35, and 43 °C are summarized in Table 3.
Simulations were developed to ensure that the Br complex is indeed TcO(OH)Br and not another complex(e. g. TcOBr). Complex concentrations were calculated using HYSS 4.0.31, using the Tc(IV) hydrolysis constants
(Table 2) and the equilibrium constants presented in Table 3. Mathematical models were applied on the experimental data using OriginPro 2019 9.6.0.172. The models
were derived from the equations presented above, but with all possible metal ligand complexes taken into account,including TcOBr+, TcO(OH)Br, and TcOBr2. The only converging model, thus the most likely to interpret our experimental data, was the one containing only the TcO(OH)r complex. Figure 3 presents the simulation data (solid lines) with the associated experimental data (data points), for the TcO(OH)Br complex case study. We observe a good agreement between the experimental results and the simulation calculations ran with the sole presence of TcO(OH) Br. Simulations performed based on the formation of TcOBr+  did not fit the experimental data. Our finding is in agreement with the literature that has shown that Tc(IV) complexes forms as TcO(OH)L with small ligands, L, such as sulfate [6], acetate [22] and citrate [7].
Table 2: Hydrolysis constants of Tc(IV) in aqueous solution.
Figure 1: Activity of 82Br (in ln unit) in irradiated solutions, post irradiation.
Figure 2: Distribution data of Tc(IV) in the presence of NaBr at 43, 28, and 18 °C.
Ionic strength maintained at 3 M with NaClO4, pcH 2. Error bars represent a 95 % confidence interval.
Table 3: Equilibrium constants for the TcO(OH)Br complex formation at various temperatures.
Figure 3: Concentration of TcO(OH)Br in pcH 2 solution as a function of aqueous Br− concentration.
Lines represent simulation data and markers represent experimental data. Error bars signify a 95 % confidence interval.
Figure 4: van’t Hoff plot of Tc(IV) complex with Br− at a pcH 2 solution.
Ionic strength maintained at 3 M with NaClO4 . Error bars represent a 95 % confidence interval.
Table 4: Thermodynamic parameters for the TcO(OH)Br complex formation.
Figure 4 presents the van’t Hoff plot based on the equilibrium constants presented in Table 3. The resulting thermodynamic parameters of the TcO(OH)Br complex, shown with Table 4, demonstrate that the formation of TcO(OH)Br is a slightly exothermic process; the complex formation is favorable at temperatures below 300.2  K, where ΔGr = 0 kJ · mol−1. With ΔHr = TΔSr , there is no clear driving force for this reaction. However, bromide will most likely form an outer-sphere complex under favorable conditions, due to the large negative entropy values
associated with the formation reaction [27, 28]. Bromide is a soft ligand and appears to not be able to efficiently displace the associated waters in the first hydration sphere
of Tc(IV). The softness of the ligand in combination to the tendency of the metal to hydrolyze, leads to TcO(OH)Br being an outer-sphere complex.
4 Conclusions
The thermodynamic parameters for the complexation of Tc(IV) and Br− in an acidic aqueous environment show that the complex is not favorable at temperatures higher than 300.2 K, where ΔGr > 0 kJ · mol−1. These findings are in agreement with previous experiments conducted on technetium bromide complexes, where it was observed that TcBr4  and TcBr6 2−, were only stable as solids, but would readily hydrolyze in solution [21]. Further experiments are needed for the quantification of thermodynamic parameters for Tc(IV) complexes with other halides in solution. It is expected that other halides, such as chloride and fluoride will form stronger complexes with Tc(IV) than bromide, whereas iodide will form an even weaker complex than bromide. The conservation of the hydroxide in the Tc–Br complex observed in this work is most likely due to the equilibrium constant of the bromocomplex being weaker than the first Tc(IV) hydrolysis product formation, thus leading to an addition reaction (TcO(OH)+ + Br− TcO(OH)Br), and not to a displacement reaction (TcO(OH)+ + Br− TcOBr+ + OH−). These findings are corroborated by Hess, who concluded that Tc(IV) forms significant amounts as TcO(OH)L with oxalate, a medium to weak ligand [29]. Since the hydrolysis of Tc(IV) is so large it is reasonable to expect a displacement of the hydroxide in complexes formed with stronger complexing ligands, such as EDTA [4].
Acknowledgements:
This work was funded by the U.S.National Nuclear Security Administration, under theSSAA Grant DE-NA0002916, Funder id: http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000015.