<title>The development status of PUREX process for nuclear fuel reprocessing from an insight from PATENTS</title>
<author>Yading Zhang; Ran Su; Xiaofei Chen; Chao Ren; Yanjia Lv; Dan Mo; Min Liu; Shoujun Yan</author>
<Affiliation>China Institute of Nuclear Information and Economics</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-019-06745-w</DOI>
<URL>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-019-06745-w?utm_source=cnki&utm_medium=affiliate&utm_content=meta&utm_campaign=DDCN_1_GL01_metadata</URL>
Abstract
The PUREX process has been one of the most successful methods to reprocess spent nuclear fuel for several decades, and further enhancements have being carried out in the worldwide. The published global patents about the PUREX technology are investigated in this work. The technology forecasting and the development strategy of PUREX process was provided from the view of patents, based on the nations, the technology field, the trend in the number of patent applications. The purpose of this work is to help the technical personnel in this field to understand the advanced development of PUREX technology from a new perspective.
Introduction
With the level of science constantly improving, the ability of innovation in science and technology are also constantly improved [1]. Nowadays, the core competitiveness of a country is increasingly manifested as its ability to cultivate, allocate and regulate intellectual resources and intellectual achievements.
With the development of science and technology, intellectual property has been widely valued in the world. Protection of intellectual property helps to promote social development in a positive and orderly manner [2]. “The distance between innovation and market place is shrinking [3]”. Indeed, innovation is advancing more quickly from conception to deployment and has become the principal driver of world economic growth. Innovators and enterprises rely on patents to secure their core technologies and investment capital, and to bring new products and services to the global market [4].
The World Intellectual Property Organization says that A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention, which is a product or a process that provides, in general, a new way of doing something, or offers a new technical solution to a problem. To get a patent, technical information about the invention must be disclosed to the public in a patent application. Patents are not just abstract concepts; they play an invaluable, practical role in everyday life. By rewarding ideas, patents encourage the development of innovations and new technologies in every field [5].
Patent analysis is a process whereby larger, specifically selected collections of patent document are analyzed to derive important technical, legal and business information. While patent documents are published, and thus, are publicly available information, selecting the relevant set of data, preparing it for analysis visualization itself requires a great deal of time and expertise. Aggregation of patent information provides technical and commercial conclusions, such as macro innovation or industry wide or from a single organization perspective. It also provides an overview of the major players within a space expertise and interest in the field.
Spent nuclear fuel reprocessing stands as a major challenge for the nuclear industry [6]. PUREX is a chemical method used to purify fuel for nuclear reactors or nuclear weapons. It is an acronym standing for Plutonium Uranium Redox EXtraction [7]. PUREX is the de facto standard aqueous nuclear reprocessing method for the recovery of uranium and plutonium from used “spent”, or “irradiated” nuclear fuel. It is based on liquid–liquid extraction ion-exchange [6].
The PUREX process has been one of the successful methods to reprocess spent nuclear fuel for several decades [8], and further enhancements are being carried out in the worldwide.
All commercial reprocessing plants use the well-proven hydrometallurgical PUREX process, which separates uranium and plutonium very effectively.
As the PUREX process has been one of the successful methods to reprocess spent nuclear fuel for several decades, further enhancements are being carried out in the worldwide. Patents combine extensive technological and commercial information, which reflect the direction of the technology development [9].
The global published patents about the PUREX technology are investigated in this work, which will contribute to understanding the advanced developments of the PUREX related technology by a new perspective.
Patent retrieval strategy
The first and perhaps most critical step in the patent research is a clearly defined and sufficiently focused area and scope of search of the patent.
The database for patent retrieval in this research includes patent information of 116 countries and regions in the world.
The key word was selected as PUREX and uranium or Plutonium in the description of patent document in order to search the patents. The specific patent retrieval strategies are shown in the Table 1.
Table 1 Patent retrieval strategy and result
The result shows that there have been 616 related patents and 391 patent families by December 31th 2018.
A patent family is a set of patents taken in various countries to protect a single invention. A patent family is a collection of patent applications covering the same or similar technical content. The applications in a family are related to each other through priority claims.
A single patent family is counted as “1” in this research so it can provides a more accurate measure of the level of inventive activity from an entity within the technical space, and a truer picture of the overall level of innovation across the field as a whole.
Innovation rate analysis
The Innovation Rate graph as Fig. 1 shows the annual patenting trend in the technology field of PUREX.
Fig. 1
figure1
The innovation rate graph
The trend for published patent applications are displayed in green, and the trend in published granted patents displayed in yellow.
Such an analysis method is helpful for understanding the patenting pace of a technology area over a period of time.
The graph indicates exactly the technology came into fruition in 1947, then it has been developing steadily and continuously until 2007. Basically, the number of patent applications per year is less than ten. After 2007, more than ten patent applications were filed each year.
It can be seen that although PUREX technology has been proposed for more than 70 years, it is still in the process of continuous improvement and continues to produce new results.
Frequent technology analysis
The pie chart categorizes the most frequent keywords into a 2-tier hierarchy of within the most recent INPADOC Families in the technology field.
This picture shows a more granular and structured arrangement of the different technology and keyword focus of patents in the technology field.
As shown in the Fig. 2, the topic of Aqueous Solution, Organic Phase and Aqueous Phase, Nitric Acid and Fission Products Corresponding to the top four most patents. We can infer that patents for these technologies are the focus of PUREX related research.
Fig. 2
figure2
The pie chart of the most frequent technology
Geographic analysis
Patents are territorial rights. In general, the exclusive rights are only applicable in the country or region in which a patent has been filed and granted, in accordance with the law of that country or region.
The geographic breakdown shows the percentage breakdown of the patents across different jurisdictions (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3
figure3
The geographic breakdown graph
Analysis of geographical distribution through the above charts is helpful for understanding the territorial markets the technology field is prominent and commercialized in.
PUREX process has been adopted in post-treatment plants in France, UK, Russia and Japan, America and China are also conducting relevant research.
It can be seen that the countries with the largest number of patents are the countries with the most application of PUREX technology (Table 2).
Table 2 Number of patents in each region
This not only reflects the technological advancement of these countries, but also reflects the purpose of promoting market competition through patent distribution.
Top organizations
The graph shows the portfolio sizes of the top organizations, which is Helpful for Understanding the key players and the threat of competition (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4
figure4
The top organizations graph
It can be seen that the main patentees in PUREX are COMMISSARIAT A LENERGIE, FRAMATOME, ORANO in France, CHINA INSTITUTE OF ATOMIC ENERGY, and other units in UK, America, and Japan such as British Nuclear Fuels Ltd, UNITED STATES ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION, GE and HITACHI.
The patenting activity by geography of similar portfolios graph shows the geographic distribution of patent publications for the organization’s holding most similar portfolios.
This picture is helpful for benchmarking the geographic distribution of patent filing by an organization against the geographic distribution of patent filing by organizations with similar portfolio focuses.
Two distinct features can be seen from the Fig. 5. One is that CHINA INSTITUTE OF ATOMIC ENERGY has applied for a large number of patents, but only in CHINA. The other is that other Key Player’s patents are basically distributed in more countries.
Fig. 5
figure5
The patenting activity by geography of patents graph
The patenting activity by year of similar portfolios graph shows the trend in annual patent publications for the organization’s holding most similar portfolios (Fig. 6).
Fig. 6
figure6
The patenting activity by year of s patents graph
This picture is helpful for benchmarking the patenting activity of an organization against the patenting activity of organizations with similar portfolio focuses.
It can be seen that COMMISSARIAT A LENERGIE, CHINA INSTITUTE OF ATOMIC ENERGY and ORANO have the largest number of patent applications in recent years, which basically reflects the degree of investment in PUREX technology by Units in France and China in recent years.
Result
The Major technical areas of PUREX patents is Aqueous Solution; Organic Phase and Aqueous Phase; Nitric Acid and Fission Products.
There are 616 Related Patents, Contain 391 Patent Families, and 304 Patent Families were Applied in Multiple Areas.
The Major countries are America, Germany, UK, China, France and Japan.
Key Players are COMMISSARIAT A LENERGIE, CHINA INSTITUTE OF ATOMIC ENERGY, KERNFORSCHUNGSZENT KARLSRUHE and British Nuclear Fuels Ltd.
Conclusions
In the process of development of nuclear technology, research and innovation units should make full use of patent documents and draw lessons from other people’s advanced technologies in order to obtain ideas for solving technical problems [10].
PUREX process is an important part of spent fuel reprocessing. With the development of nuclear power and the increasing demand for spent fuel reprocessing all over the world, how to obtain the trend and improvement direction of mature PUREX technology from patent literature and how to fully refer to the technical inspiration in patent literature is scientific. It is necessary for researchers to pay more attention to further strengthen the research of patent literature in the future in order to get more enlightenment.
