<title>Modeling and simulation of diluent recovery unit in PUREX solvent regeneration system</title>
<author>P. Vishnu Anand; R. Rajeev; P. Velavendan; N.K. Pandey; U. Kamachi Mudali</author>
<Affiliation>RR&DD, Reprocessing Group, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam, Tamil Nadu 603102, India</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2017.01.011</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197017300203</URL>
Highlights
VLE data of TBP-NPH system at different pressures were measured experimentally.
Wilson and NRTL models were used to correlate the VLE data.
Thermodynamic consistency of the VLE data was carried out using Herington method.
Mathematical model of distillation column was developed and solved numerically.
Abstract
The presented work details the modeling and simulation of distillation column for the separation of tributyl phosphate (TBP) and normal paraffin hydrocarbon (NPH) which is an integral unit in the PUREX solvent regeneration system. The vapor liquid equilibrium data of TBP + NPH system at 5.5 torr and 7.5 torr were experimentally generated using an ebulliometer and the data were subjected to thermodynamic consistency test using Herington's method. The experimental VLE data were correlated using Wilson and non random two-liquid (NRTL) models and the binary interaction parameters regressed from the data are reported. The distillation column simulation was carried out using an algorithm involving separate solver/corrector loops for the MESH variables and the NRTL model was used for predicting the vapor liquid equilibrium of TBP-NPH system. Validity of the developed code was tested by comparing the simulation outputs with the experimental results from PUREX solvent regeneration plant.
Keywords：Distillation column；Vapor-liquid equilibrium；Activity coefficients；Simulation；Solvent regeneration；PUREX process
1. Introduction
The PUREX process (Lanham and Runion, 1949) employs Tributyl phosphate (TBP) diluted with hydrocarbon as solvent is widely used for the recovery and recycle of uranium and plutonium from spent nuclear fuels. Even after six decades since its inception, due to competency of the PUREX process over various other reprocessing techniques, still it remains as the workhorse in many existing reprocessing plants. It is widely recognized that tributyl phosphate and hydrocarbon diluents are degraded due to hydrolytic and radiolytic reactions, forming activity-binding degradation products that can cause product losses, poor separation efficiencies and emulsions which could interfere with process operations (Lanham and Reilly, 1951, Goode, 1956; Mailen and Tallent, 1984). The primary degradation products (i.e. dibutyl phosphate, monobutyl phosphate, phosphoric acid and butanol) are produced from the hydrolytic and dealkylation reactions of the TBP when contacted with nitric acid. The secondary degradation products (nitroparraffins, aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids), on the other hand are originated from the radiolytic reactions of diluents when exposed to intensive radiation (Blake, 1968, Nowak et al., 1972). The presence of degradation products even at concentrations of 10−5 to 10−3 M in the solvent influences the extraction performances. The most significant single parameter which affects solvent extraction process operability and product quality is the quality of the solvent. Hydraulic stability of the solvent extraction contactors and decontamination of the heavy metal from the fission products is directly traceable to the solvent quality. Hence the solvent must be purified before it is recycled back to process.
In the PUREX process, generally, the spent solvent is continuously regenerated by scrubbing with sodium carbonate/hydroxide after each pass through the process and most of the radioactivity belonging to primary degradation products is removed. Residual activity due to secondary degradation products are essentially surface tension-active agents and complexing agents of plutonium, zirconium and ruthenium, however, cannot be removed by washing these solutions as the degraded long-chain soluble organic compounds tend to remain in the solvent even after scrubbing with carbonate washing solutions and complex fission products again when the solvent is recycled. These degradation products progressively accumulate in the solvent with repeated recycling and their removal from the solvent is not well addressed as that of the primary degradation products of TBP. With time, the solvent performance characteristics become so impaired that its partial refreshment is required at intervals. In fact, the amount of organics generated in the extraction process can be reduced considerably by adopting a suitable solvent regeneration process.
A common method for purifying organics is distillation. The alternate method reported in literature has shown that the secondary degradation products can also be removed by passing the spent solvent through a solid adsorbent bed packed with activated alumina or base treated silica gel (Neace, 1983, Talent et al., 1984, Olson and McCray, 1986, Mailen, 1987). This bed was also shown to remove secondary degradation products of solvent. Engineering problems could be foreseen with this process since it has not been used in an operating plant. This includes the potential generation of additional radioactive solid waste, how to extend bed life and what bed regeneration techniques might be available to make the process more operable in a radiochemical plant.
Considerable effort has been devoted to the development of distillation method for PUREX-solvent purification (Sicilio et al., 1961, Clark and Nichols, 1965, Ginisty and Guillaume, 1990, Drain et al., 1996, Zilberman et al., 2002, Pandey et al., 2013), but its industrial application is limited (Drain et al., 1996). There is lack of information in the literature on the modeling and simulation of distillation column to address this issue. Process modeling is a technique used in chemical engineering process design extensively. A simulation is the representation of the real world process or system over a period of time. Further, simulation involves the generation of artificial history of the system and the observation of artificial history to draw inferences concerning of the operating characteristic of the real system. Thus, modeling and simulation can be used both as an analysis tool for predicting the effect of changes to existing system and as a design tool to predict the performance of new system under the varying set of circumstances. In addition it also minimizes the requirement of the number of experimental runs. The present work details the modeling and simulation of the distillation column for the recovery of diluent and solvent from the spent solvent.
2. Mathematical model of the distillation column
Mathematical model of distillation column for the separation of TBP-NPH mixture is based on material balance, equilibrium vapor-liquid relationship, composition constraints and energy balance. The model equations which completely describe a theoretical stage are generally known as MESH equations and they are shown in Fig. 1. The distillation unit consists of NS stages, where the 1st stage is a total condenser and NSth stage is a partial reboiler. All the stages except condenser stage are assumed to be theoretical stages, i.e. the vapor and liquid streams leaving the stage are brought to thermodynamic phase equilibrium. Due to low pressure drop offered by the structured packing used in the column, the pressure along the length of the unit is assumed to be constant. Column is assumed to be adiabatic as it is well insulated and heat loss is negligible.
Fig. 1. Distillation column model.
The model equations formulated for stages 1 to NS are as follows:
2.1. Material and enthalpy balance equations (M&H)
For condenser (k = 1).
Component mass balance:
@(1)
where, i = 1,…, Nc and k = 1,…,Ns.
Enthalpy balance:
@(2)
For any stage in rectification and stripping section (k = 2,…,Nf - 1 for rectification and k = Nf + 1,…,Ns-1 for stripping section).
Component mass balance:
@(3)
Enthalpy balance:
@(4)
For feed stage (k = Nf).
Component mass balance:
@(5)
Enthalpy balance:
@(6)
For reboiler (k = Ns).
Component mass balance:
@(7)
Enthalpy balance:
@(8)
2.2. Equilibrium and summation equations (E&S)
Vapor-liquid equilibrium relationship:
@(9)
Composition constraints:
@(10)
@(11)
3. Vapor-liquid equilibrium (VLE) of TBP-NPH system
3.1. Vapor liquid equilibrium measurements
A necessary prerequisite for any realistic simulation of distillation column in the separation of TBP-NPH system is the VLE data at low pressures. Due to scarcity of reliable VLE data of the system in literature, it was experimentally generated using an ebulliometer (M/s. Abhishek scientifics Mumbai). Ebulliometer used for vapor liquid equilibrium experiments essentially consists of vaporizer, Cottrel pump, equilibrium chamber and an overhead condenser as shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Ebulliometer used for generating vapor liquid equilibrium data of TBP + NPH system.
The apparatus allows recirculation of both liquid and vapor phases, and it is provided with sampling ports for both vapor condensate and residual liquid. Liquid mixture in the vaporizer is vaporized at a slow and controlled rate using a direct electrical heating system with manual controller. The vapor/liquid mixture rises through the Cottrel pump and flashes in the equilibrium chamber. The residual liquid gets collected at the liquid port, and the vapor fraction is condensed and collected at the vapor condensate port. A portion of residual liquid and vapor condensate is continuously circulated back to the vaporizer, and sampling is done when equilibrium is established in the system. Compositions of liquid (x) and vapor (y) in the collected samples were determined by gas chromatography (Shimadzu GC-14B). The required operating pressure in the system is maintained with the help of a multi stage rotary vacuum pump, and the system pressure is measured using capacitance manometer with heated baratron (MKS. USA). Equilibrium temperature is measured using a platinum resistance thermometer placed in a thermowell located at the equilibrium chamber. Experiments were carried out using TBP-NPH system at different pressures (5.5 torr and 7.5 torr).
3.2. Vapor-liquid equilibrium model
The vapor-liquid equilibrium ratio K can be calculated by equating vapor and liquid phase fugacities (fiV and fiL).
@(12)
@(13)
@(14)
At low pressures the vapor phase can be treated as ideal gas, hence φiV, φiL and ψi are taken as unity. Combining Eqs. (12)–(14) the vapor-liquid equilibrium ratio for any stage in the column simplifies to,
@(15)
3.3. Correlation of phase equilibrium
There are many activity coefficient models reported literature for correlating experimental VLE data. The better-known solution models include Margules, van Laar, Wilson, NRTL, and UNIQUAC models. Of these, based on frequencies of best fits, the following choices are best when only one liquid is anticipated:
•For aqueous organics: NRTL
•For alcohols and phenols: Wilson
•For alcohols, ketones, and ethers: Wilson or Margules (Wilson is preferred due to its improved ability to correct for changes in temperature)
•For C4-C18 hydrocarbons: Wilson
•For aromatics: Wilson or Margules (Wilson is preferred due to its improved ability to correct for changes in temperature)
Due to proven applicability of Wilson and NRTL equation (Walas, 1985) for representing VLE of organic systems, they were considered here for correlating the experimental data. The two models used here are as follows:
3.3.1. Wilson equation
Based on the concept of local composition, Wilson (1964) presented the following expression for the excess Gibbs energy of a binary system.
@(16)
The activity coefficients derived from this equation are
@(17)
@(18)
@(19)
@(20)
where, λ12 and λ21 are temperature and composition independent binary interaction parameters.
3.3.2. NRTL equation (non-random two liquid equation)
The concept of local composition was used by Renon and Prausnitz (1968) in their derivation of the NRTL (non-random two liquid) equation. The NRTL equation for the excess Gibbs energy is,
@(21)
and the activity coefficients derived from this equation are
@(22)
@(23)
@(24)
@(25)
@(26)
@(27)
Where, α, (g12-g22) and (g12-g11) parameters specific to particular pair of species, are independent of composition and temperature.
3.4. Enthalpy estimation
Enthalpy of liquid solution at a given temperature is function of liquid phase composition, enthalpies of pure components at the same temperature, and heat of mixing of the components. For all practical purposes vapor-enthalpy can be calculated by assuming that the components are heated separately as liquid to the dew point temperature, individually vaporized at this temperature, and then mixed together (Treybal, 1980). As the NPH used in our application contains more than 89 percent of normal dodecane (NDD), physical properties of NDD (Table 1) were used here for all the calculations. Liquid and vapor phase enthalpies were estimated from the pure component properties as shown below:
@(28)
@(29)
@(30)
@(31)
Table 1. Physical property of TBP and NDD.
Where TL and TG are bubble point and dew point temperatures. T0 is the standard temperature for enthalpy estimation and it was taken as 25 °C. Since the heat of mixing data for TBP-NPH system is not available in literature, hence, that part was omitted from Eq. (28).
3.5. Vapor pressures estimation
Vapor pressures of TBP and NPH were calculated using following equations, where Eq. (32) is taken from literature (Pandey et al., 2013) and Eq. (33) was obtained by regression of the experimental data.
@(32)
@(33)
4. Results and discussion
4.1. VLE data analysis
A review of literature data (Xueqiang et al., 2011, Min et al., 2012, Mqondisi et al., 2013, Sheng-kai et al., 2013, Zheng et al., 2013, Arvelos et al., 2014, Peng et al., 2014, Soujanya et al., 2014, Arturo and de la Fuente, 2015, Vineet et al., 2015, Maoqiong et al., 2016, Nilesh et al., 2016) indicates that the objective function could be represented as a function of different variables: temperature, pressure, compositions (liquid and vapour), and activity coefficients, either separately or in combination with no significant advantage claimed for one form over the other. Since, the objective function involving activity coefficient and pressure was used for a large set of DECHEMA VLE data (Walas, 1985) hence combination of same was used in the present investigation for the analysis VLE data for TBP-NPH system. The experimental VLE data was correlated using Wilson and NRTL equations by minimizing the following objective function:
@(34)
The model parameters obtained by regressing the experimental data and the observed root-mean squared deviation (RMSD) while predicting the vapor-liquid equilibria are listed in Table 2. Regression of the experimental VLE data was carried out using the function Fminsearch in MATLAB. Renon and Prausnitz (1968) suggested non-randomness factor (αij), in the range of 0.2–0.47 depending on the chemical nature of constituents. As per Marina and Tassios (1973) αij = −1 gives excellent representation for miscible and partially immiscible binaries. Based on these observations the non-randomness factor was allowed to vary between −1 and 0.47 during the data regression, and it was found to be 0.18 and −0.29 as the most suitable values corresponding to 5.5 torr and 7.5 torr respectively. Using the parameters listed in Table 2, the bubble point temperature and vapor phase compositions were estimated and compared with the experimental data in terms of percentage deviation and the details are listed in Table 3 and Table 4. Comparison of experimental and predicted VLE is also shown graphically in Fig. 3, Fig. 4 respectively. Based on the RMSD values, it can be seen that both the models representing the VLE data of TBP + NPH system reasonably well as the highest RMSD value itself is only 2.19 percent. Though the comparison between the models shows Wilson equation as superior one at 5.5 torr and NRTL at 7.5 torr, the difference in capability of the models for representing VLE of TBP + NPH systems seems to be marginal.
Table 2. Correlation parameters for the Wilson and NRTL models for TBP(1) + NPH(2) system.
Table 3. The experimental and calculated data for the tri-butyl phosphate (1) + NPH (2) system at 5.5 torr.a
Table 4. The experimental and calculated data for the tri-butyl phosphate (1) + NPH (2) system at 7.5 torr.a
Fig. 3. VLE of TBP (1) + NPH (2) at 5.5 torr and 7.5 torr represented by NRTL model: (●), experimental data at 7.5 torr; (▼), experimental data at 5.5 torr; (---), NRTL model.
Fig. 4. VLE of TBP (1) + NPH (2) at 5.5 torr and 7.5 torr represented by Wilson model: (●), experimental data at 7.5 torr; (▼), experimental data at 5.5 torr; (---), Wilson model.
4.2. Thermodynamic consistency testing
To verify the reliability of the experimental VLE data, thermodynamic consistency test was carried out using Herington method (Herington, 1951) explained below:
@(35)
@(36)
Tmax and Tmin are highest and lowest boiling point in the relevant system, in Kelvin. According to this method, the experimental data is consistent if D is less than J or  is less than 10 (Yingshu et al., 2013, Yumei, 2014). Details of the thermodynamic consistency test are shown in Table 5, and it indicates the experimental data corresponds to 5.5 torr as well as 7.5 torr are thermodynamically consistent.
Table 5. Results of thermodynamic consistency check using Herington's test.
4.3. Distillation column simulation
For identifying the suitable thermodynamic model, regression analysis of experimental VLE data was carried out and it can be seen from the analysis that both Wilson and NRTL models are equally good at representing VLE of TBP-NPH system, though marginal differences exist. As the operating pressure of distillation column during the experimental runs were in the range of 7–17 torr (see Table 6), NRTL model corresponds to 7.5 torr was used in the distillation model for representing the VLE data of TBP-NPH system.
Table 6. Comparison of simulation outputs with experimental results.
Since the diluent recovery unit was a part of the solvent regeneration pilot plant which was originally commissioned for carrying out studies limited to feasibility of PUREX solvent regeneration, the column was not equipped with provisions for measuring internal vapor/liquid flow rates, compositions and temperatures. Hence, the validation of the distillation column model was done by comparing the experimental and simulated values of top/bottom product compositions and the reboiler temperature.
Several experimental runs were carried as a part of feasibility studies and some of the selected data sets from these experiments were used here for the model validation purpose. Feed to the distillation column is a vapor mixture of TBP and normal paraffin hydrocarbon (NPH) with composition of C12 over 89 percent and the rest containing C11, C13 and C14. During simulation the distillation column was considered as four equilibrium stages consisting of rectification stage, feed stage, stripping stage and reboiler. The algorithm used for the simulation of the column is detailed in Fig. 5. While solving all the MESH equations simultaneously, difficulty in convergence was observed when initial guess values were not closer to actual solution. This difficulty may have arisen due to large number of variables and non-linear nature of equations. Solving M,E,&S and M&H equations in separate loops and correcting the MESH variables in subsequent steps as detailed in the algorithm had completely eliminated this difficulty and shown convergence within seconds and also in less than five iteration steps. The MESH variables in loop 1 and loop 2 (see Fig. 5) of the simulation program were solved using the function fsolve in MATLAB. Comparison between the simulation results and the plant data is shown in Table 6 and it can be seen that the calculated values of bottom product composition and reboiler temperatures are in good agreement with the experimental data. Compositions of the top and bottom products were analyzed using gas chromatography (Shimadzu GC-14B) and for five set of data the TBP composition in the top product was found to be below detection level. Hence, the validation of the developed model was done by comparing simulation outputs corresponding to bottom product composition and the reboiler temperature. Since the temperature and concentration profiles for all the sets seem to be similar in nature, concentration/temperature profile of one of the sets is shown graphically in Fig. 6.
Fig. 5. Algorithm for solving MESH equations by flow rate and composition correction.
Fig. 6. Graphical representation of simulation results: concentration and temperature profile.
5. Conclusions
The diluent and solvent recovery unit which is a part of the PUREX solvent regeneration system was simulated using a new algorithm involving separate solver/corrector loops for MESH variables. By solving the MESH variables in separate loops and correcting those in subsequent steps had eliminated the difficulty in convergence which was observed when MESH variables were attempted to solve together. For the purpose of design of the diluent recovery unit, the vapor liquid equilibrium of TBP + NPH system at different pressures (5.5 torr and 7.5 torr) were generated using a glass ebulliometer at our R&D lab. The experimental VLE data were subjected to thermodynamic consistency test based on Herington's method and found thermodynamically consistent. The VLE data sets were correlated using thermodynamic models such as NRTL model and Wilson equation and it was found that both the models are equally good at representing the VLE of TBP + NPH system. The validity of the developed code was checked by comparing the simulation outputs with results of solvent purification plant runs. Hence, the developed code can be used for simulating the performance of all types of adiabatic fractionating columns for separating binary mixtures.
