<title>Conceptual design of an innovative reduced moderation thorium‐fueled small modular reactor with heavy‐water coolant</title>
<author> Tengfei Zhang; Jinbiao Xiong; Xiaojing Liu; Xiang Chai; Wei Li; Xu Cheng</author>
<Affiliation>School of Nuclear Science and Engineering Shanghai Jiao Tong University Shanghai China ; Institute of Fusion and Nuclear Technology Karlsruhe Institute of Technology Karlsruhe Germany</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.4827</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4827</URL>
Summary
This paper presents an innovative conceptual design for small modular reactors, the reduced-moderation small modular reactor (RMSMR), for the sustainable use of nuclear resources. The concept is established by a modification of the well-understood pressurized water reactor technology. A reduced-moderation lattice and heavy-water coolant are used to yield an epithermal-to-fast neutron spectrum, which is beneficial for attaining a large conversion ratio and reducing the burnup reactivity swing throughout the core lifetime. Two-dimensional pin cell and three-dimensional core burnup calculations are performed to systematically analyze the neutronics influences of important parameters, such as the coolant type, moderator-to-fuel ratio, and fuel type. The RMSMR adopts a three-zone uranium-thorium dioxide fuel configuration to flatten the power distribution and ensure a negative void coefficient. The radial and axial blanket regions are found to enhance the breeding effect. The proposed RMSMR can sustain power generation of 100 MWe for 7 years without refueling and achieve a conversion ratio of 0.85 at the end of the cycle. Numerical simulations indicate that the proposed concept has satisfactory shutdown margins and reactivity coefficients and conservative thermal-hydraulic safety. The RMSMR may be a promising candidate to fill the gap between light-water reactors and fast breeder reactors.
Nomenclature
BOC
beginning of cycle
BWR
boiling water reactor
CR
conversion ratio
CTC
coolant temperature coefficient
EOC
end of cycle
FP
fission product
FTC
fuel temperature coefficient
LBE
lead bismuth eutectic
LMFR
liquid metal fast reactor
LWR
light water reactor
mDNBR
minimum departure from nuclear boiling ratio
MFR
moderator-to-fuel ratio
MOC
middle of cycle
PWR
pressurized water reactor
RMSMR
reduced-moderation small modular reactor
RMWR
reduced-moderation water-cooled reactor
ThO2
thorium dioxide
UN
uranium nitride
UO2
uranium dioxide
VC
void coefficient
XS
cross section
2D
two-dimensional
3D
three-dimensional
1 INTRODUCTION
Over the years, nuclear energy has played a pivotal role in fulfilling the world's energy demand, especially in relation to sustainable development and mitigation of the greenhouse effect. The light-water reactor (LWR) is currently the world's dominant nuclear reactor type. However, fast breeder reactors that use liquid metal as the coolant (liquid metal fast reactors; LMFRs) have drawn increasing attention due to their more efficient use of uranium resources and lower production of nuclear waste.1, 2 LMFRs are characterized by fast neutron spectra, a nuclear feature that increases the fission-to-capture ratio and the number of neutrons per fission. This leads to more excess neutron production from fissile isotopes (such as 233U, 235U, and 239Pu) to generate fertile isotopes (232Th and 238U) to produce fissile nuclear materials. Whereas commercial LWRs use uranium with an efficiency of less than 1%, the efficiency of fast reactors is substantially greater, resulting in hundred-fold improvements in nuclear fuel use.3 To obtain a fast neutron spectrum, coolant materials with small neutron scattering cross sections (XSs) can be used, such as sodium, lead, and lead bismuth eutectic (LBE).4, 5 Recent decades have witnessed unprecedented development in fast reactor technology, but the mainstream fast reactors (ie, LMFRs) are still dogged by problems that delay the licensing and rapid expansion of this technology. For instance, although the sodium fast reactor (SFR) has long been viewed as a promising candidate for the development of fast neutron reactors due to its neutronics characteristics,3 it is hindered by the reactivity of sodium with water and air. As a result, extreme care is required in handling elemental/metallic liquid sodium to avoid leakage of this coolant from the reactor. In contrast, heavy liquid metals such as lead and LBE are chemically stable. In a nuclear reactor, lead and LBE are intrinsically suitable for radiation shielding and fission product (FP) retention and are amenable to the acquisition of hard neutron spectra. However, LBE produces nonnegligible amounts of the radiotoxic isotope 210Po under radiation, and lead has a high melting temperature, which adds to the difficulty of in-vessel fuel management. More importantly, both coolants are corrosive, which poses serious risks to structural materials.6
As an alternative to the adoption of heavy metal coolants, another efficient means of hardening the neutron spectrum is to reduce the moderator usage by decreasing the moderator-to-fuel ratio (MFR). The key is to arrange the fuel pins in a tightly packed pattern (tight lattice) that significantly weakens neutron deceleration, resulting in an epithermal-to-fast neutron spectrum. Based on this philosophy, the concept of the reduced-moderation water-cooled reactor (RMWR) was proposed. The first RMWR program was conducted by the US Department of Energy in the mid-1960s to develop an LWR with expanded usage efficiency of nuclear fuel resources.7 In 2000, aiming for the goal of long-term energy supply from uranium resources, researchers at the Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute (JAERI) initiated systematic studies on the development of the RMWR. The key intentions were two-fold: targeting a conversion ratio (CR) greater than 1.0 while ensuring negative void coefficients (VCs) throughout the operation cycle.8, 9 A surge of studies on the RMWR emerged thereafter. Early efforts focused on the concept of the boiling water reactor (BWR) combined with triangular fuel lattices to reduce the volume ratio of water. Mixed-Oxide (MOX) fuels with multiple plutonium recycling were considered. To ensure negative VCs, the reactor core was arranged in a pan-like short configuration, which increased the neutron leakage in the case of coolant loss. In the axial direction, blankets were deployed not only at the two ends but also in the center to maximize the CR. Although the internal blanket proved beneficial in accomplishing CRs greater than 1.0, it tended to cause axial decoupling. It was noted that flux distributions in a decoupled core are sensitive to perturbations, which are thought to be undesirable in the design of a core.10
The coolant voiding in BWRs hardens the spectrum which leads to favorable fuel cycle performance, but a BWR-based reduced-moderation reactor concept generally employs hexagonal-shaped assembly geometry to achieve low coolant volume fraction, resulting in more extensive changes from current BWR technology, thus will potentially take longer to implement than a PWR-based one.8, 11-13 Furthermore, the tight-lattice core not only complicates the task of construction but also causes the critical heat flux to decrease and the pressure drop to increase at a given mass velocity.8 These effects raise safety concerns and necessitate meticulous thermal-hydraulic studies. As an alternative to increasing the void fraction and reducing the MFR (with tight-lattice configurations), hardening of the neutron spectrum can also be achieved by using heavy water (D2O) as the coolant. Despite its known disadvantages such as being costlier than light water and producing radioactive tritium element by the neutron capture reaction, heavy water presents several attractive neutronics and thermal-hydraulic features. Deuterium has an elastic scattering XS in the decelerating energy range of only about 4 b, compared with 20 b for hydrogen. Consequently, a hard neutron spectrum can be anticipated in a D2O-cooled nuclear reactor with a low coolant volume ratio. This indicates the potential merit of a heavy-water–cooled RMWR. Unlike liquid metal coolants, D2O is neither chemically active nor corrosive and has thermal-hydraulic properties similar to those of light water (H2O). Its adoption would enable the use of well-established LWR techniques because the relevant utilities have extensive experience in operating and maintaining water-cooled reactors. This brings extra benefits in terms of improving cost-effectiveness and lowering the licensing difficulty. The aforementioned considerations have stimulated a number of nuclear reactor concepts based on heavy-water coolant. Elaborate work was conducted by Hiruta and Youinou at Idaho National Laboratory on the analysis of D2O-cooled tight-pitch high-conversion PWRs, aiming at break-even or near-breeder conditions while retaining negative void reactivity.14-16 Using MOX fuel loaded in hexagonal-shaped assemblies, a series of important mechanisms were revealed, such as effects of MFRs to the spectrum hardening and influences of blankets to the breeding behavior and the coolant VC. However, the work was confined to simple models such as 3D pin-cells and 3D fuel assemblies. Further investigations with 3D reactor models are needed to look into the 3D effect of the proposed concept.
With a fast neutron spectrum, spectrum hardening results in increased reactivity, causing the coolant VC to grow positive, as in the case of SFRs or LMFRs. In this regard, it has been suggested that 232Th-233U-based fuel would outperform 238U-239Pu–based fuel in terms of attaining negative VCs. Studies have noted that at epithermal and fast energy ranges, the effect of increasing neutron energy on the fission-to-capture ratio is smallest when using a thorium-based fuel cycle. This reduces the effect of neutron spectrum hardening upon the reactivity. In addition, thorium is more abundant than rival elements, and thorium dioxide has greater thermal conductivity and a higher melting point than uranium dioxide. In a thorium-fuel–based nuclear reactor, the high gamma energy released associated with 232U increases the difficulty for the 232Th/233U recycling in comparison with the plutonium recycling, and the reduced plutonium production enhances the proliferation resistant features of the spent fuel.17 232U poses a radiation hazard for terrorists who would extract the uranium due to the 2.6 MeV gamma decay of its decay daughter, 208Tl; just 1 ppm of 232U/U poses a similar risk as reactor-grade Pu. Additionally, dilution with greater than 70% 232Th would make the material unattractive.18 As a result, RMWRs that use thorium fuel have been investigated. Perfmana et al studied the neutronics features of a heavy-water–cooled thorium breeder reactor using a pin cell model.19, 20 Greenspan et al carried out several enlightening studies of thorium BWR concepts.12, 18, 21, 22 Lindley et al have contributed greatly to research into RMWRs loaded with thorium-fueled and transuranic isotopes.11, 23-25 The main disadvantage of the thorium cycle is the lack of 233U in nature, which necessitates preparation of 233U in thorium-based reactors or accelerators. Another difference between the thorium-fueled reactors and the uranium-plutonium fuel cycle is the more pronounced positive reactivity introduction during long shutdowns due to the 27-day half-life of 233Pa, an intermediate product of the absorption on a neutron in 232Th.
Previous RMWR designs focused mostly on large-scale reactors, with the purpose of balancing the trade-off between an over-unity CR and negative VCs. The proposed concepts have tended to borrow from BWR designs to increase the CR, but it should be acknowledged that the spectrum of an RMWR is softer than that of an LMFR, which makes it difficult, if not impossible, to achieve the same breeding effect as LMFRs.23, 26 However, although less optimal as a breeder, the RMWR concept is endowed with ideal neutronics features for more sustainable use of uranium resources than mainstream LWRs. We therefore follow a different path and design an innovative long-life variation of the reduced-moderation small modular reactor27-30 (RMSMR) concept. The hard neutron spectrum suppresses the burnup reactivity swing throughout the cycle while preserving a long operation period. In the meantime, the small core size results in enhanced neutron leakage upon coolant loss accidents, which makes a negative VC easier to attain than in a large-scale reactor. This inevitably comes at the price of lowering the CR, but it is expected that the long-life feature and the well-established water reactor technology will make this concept a competitive candidate to fill the gap between LWRs and LMFRs.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, parametric studies using simplified two-dimensional (2D) pin cell models are performed to gain insights into the influence of several neutronics features. Various coolant types and MFRs are compared to confirm the superior spectrum hardening capabilities achieved by using D2O and reducing the MFR. Thorium dioxide (ThO2) fuel proves optimal for attaining a negative VC, and a suitable range of 232Th enrichment is preliminarily determined for use in the three-dimensional (3D) RMSMR design. In Section 3, the design concept of a 100-MWe RMSMR that can operate for 7 years without refueling is illustrated, including the geometric specifications and material composition, radial and axial power distributions, reactivity control scheme, reactivity coefficients, and thermal-hydraulic parameters. Based on systematic analyses, the RMSMR is demonstrated to satisfy both neutronics and thermal-hydraulic safety criteria.
2 PARAMETRIC STUDY OF 2D PIN CELL MODELS
To gain insights into the influence of reactor design upon the neutronics performances, in this section, we undertake a parametric study of the main design parameters: the coolant type, MFR, fuel type, and fuel enrichment. 2D pin cell models are constructed using the deterministic DRAGON code.31 As shown in Figure 1, we set a fixed pin pitch value of 1.26 cm, as used in a typical PWR,32 with the zirconium cladding thickness fixed as 0.05 cm. In Figure 1, the red, gray, and blue areas represent, respectively, the fuel, the cladding, and the coolant. Consequently, variations in MFRs can be achieved by adjusting the fuel rod diameter. Therefore, in following calculations, the radius of the fuel pin is varied case by case depending on the MFR value.
Figure 1
2D geometry of the unit cell [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
In DRAGON, the 172-group WIMS-D library is selected, together with the subgroup module for resonance treatment. The method of characteristics (MOC) is used to solve the 2D neutron transport equation. All calculations adopt a coolant and cladding temperature of 600 K and a fuel temperature of 900 K.
First, we examine the influence of the coolant type. A 2D pin cell with 3.0% 235U-enriched uranium oxide fuel is modeled with an MFR of 2.0 to approximate the typical arrangements used in PWRs. A comparison of the neutron spectra when using D2O and H2O coolants is shown in Figure 2. Compared with H2O coolant, D2O hardly produces any neutrons below the 1 eV thermal energy range; that is, the deceleration of neutrons is effectively suppressed. This indicates that D2O outperforms H2O in terms of generating a harder neutron spectrum at the same MFR.
Figure 2
Comparison of neutron spectra with H2O and D2O coolants [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Second, the neutron spectra for the D2O coolant with various MFR values are compared in Figure 3. Here, the MFRs of the D2O-cooled unit cell are varied by changing the fuel rod's outer radius. As the MFR decreases, more neutrons are shifted toward the fast energy range between 10 keV and 1 MeV. Therefore, it is anticipated that more pronounced fissile isotope conversion can be achieved by the replacement of H2O with D2O given a tight fuel lattice configuration.
Figure 3
Comparison of neutron spectra with different moderator-to-fuel ratios (MFRs) using D2O coolant [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
In the following, the influence of different fuel types is investigated. Three different kinds of fuels,33 ie, the uranium dioxide (UO2) fuel, the uranium nitride (UN) fuel, and 233U-ThO2 fuel are compared with an enrichment of 10.0% for fissile isotopes (235U for UO2 and UN, and 233U for 233U-ThO2). The UO2 fuel has found wide applications in the nuclear power engineering. The UN fuel are an advanced type of nuclear fuel which has higher thermal conductivity, lower linear expansion coefficient, and better compatibility with coolant and fuel cladding materials. The 233U-ThO2 fuel is the mixed fuel from ThO2 and 233UO2. Again, the MFR of 2.0 is set uniformly for all fuel types, and the H2O and D2O coolant types are compared. The geometries are the same as that shown in Figure 1. A discharged burnup of 60 GWd/tU is considered, corresponding to a 500-day depletion period with a 120-W/g power density. Figure 4 compares the keff changes with burnup of various fuel types, and Figure 5 portrays the evolution of the VCs with time. Due to the accumulation of FPs with the burnup, keff values in Figure 4 present decreasing trends for all fuel types. 233U-ThO2 presents larger keff at the beginning of cycle (BOC) and the end of cycle (EOC). This is because that 233U has a higher net number of fission-generated neutrons per thermal neutron absorption and a lower value of epithermal resonance capture to fission ratio, as is shown in Table 1. In addition, a harder neutron spectrum resulted from D2O coolant tends to produce lower excess reactivity. This causes the D2O-cooled keff values in Figure 4 to appear smaller than the H2O-cooled cases. Therefore, the enrichment of fissile isotopes should be increased while using D2O coolant. Last but not least, with D2O as the coolant, the burnup reactivity swing can be significantly reduced, ie, the decrease in keff with increasing burnup becomes slower. For the 233U-ThO2 fuel case, D2O coolant results in around 18 000 pcm burnup reactivity swing, which is around 1/3 of that caused by H2O coolant.
Figure 4
keff Comparison with different fuels [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 5
Void coefficient comparison with different fuels [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 1. Neutronics properties of fissile isotopes17
Parameter	233U	235U	239Pu
Thermal XS σa	364	405	1045
(barns) σf	332	346	695
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4827:er4827-math-0001	0.096	0.171	0.504
ηth	2.26	2.08	1.91
Neutron yield ν	2.48	2.43	2.87
Delayed neutron yield β	0.0031	0.069	0.0026
Abbreviation: XS, cross section.
Figure 5 compares the evolution of the VCs for the various fuels as a function of depletion. For simplicity, the VC is evaluated as the reactivity difference between a coolant voiding of 100% and that of 0%. The VC tends to become more positive for all fuels due to the accumulation of minor actinides. However, it is observed that the 232Th/233U fuel is less affected by spectrum hardening than the other two fuel types, which lowers its VCs. During the entire cycle, VCs for 233U-ThO2 fuel are noticeably lower than those for UO2 fuel and UN fuel. This is explained by the fact that at epithermal energies, the fission-to-capture ratio of 233U changes the least with the increase in neutron energy compared with all other fissile isotopes, as is shown in Figure 6. This reduces the effect of the spectrum hardening (caused by coolant voiding) on the reactivity.
Figure 6
Comparison of fission-to-capture ratio for 233U, 235U and 239Pu [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
To gain insights into the breeding capability of different fuel types, we calculate the variable ∆Fuelfissile15 to evaluate the relative change in total fissile isotope mass as follows:
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4827:er4827-math-0002
in which MEOC and MBOC are the fissile isotope masses at the EOC and BOC, respectively. Obviously, ∆Fuelfissile ≥ 0 implies breeding behavior (ie, the production of fissile isotopes outweighs their consumption). Table 2 tabulates the ∆Fuelfissile for various fuel types. The ∆Fuelfissile value is −12.9% when D2O coolant is used for 233U-ThO2 fuel. UN fuel presents a slightly better fissile conversion effect, but the higher VCs shown in Figure 5 make it a less competitive candidate than 233U-ThO2 fuel. Although all of the cases fail to achieve a positive ∆Fuelfissile, the loss of less than 15.0% of fissile isotopes during the cycle indicates the possibility of significantly extending the cycle length of a nuclear reactor, especially when a smaller MFR is used. Based on the above analyses, ThO2 fuel is concluded to be preferable to the other studied fuel types in terms of neutronics features. Therefore, we consider only the 233U-ThO2 fuel type in the following analyses.
Table 2. ∆Fuelfissile comparison of different fuel types
Fuel Type	Coolant Type	∆Fuelfissile- %
UO2	H2O	−54.4
D2O	−15.6
UN	H2O	−49.9
D2O	−12.8
233U-ThO2	H2O	−50.3
D2O	−12.9
Abbreviations: UN, uranium nitride; UO2, uranium dioxide; ThO2, thorium dioxide.
As mentioned above, further hardening of the neutron spectrum can be achieved by reducing the MFR values. Figures 7 and 8 compare the keff and VCs of the 10.0% enrichment 233U-ThO2 fuel with different MFRs. Table 3 presents the ∆Fuelfissile values. The MFR values considered range between 0.65 and 2.0, since a MFR of 0.65 corresponds possibly to the lowest pitch-to-diameter (P/D) ratio in fast nuclear reactors (1.1) while a MFR of 2.0 is a typical value for PWRs. As is shown in Figure 7, all cases succeed in preserving criticality throughout the cycle; however, with the decrease in MFR, the burnup reactivity swing between BOC and EOC becomes smaller. This reduction in swing is due to the more efficient breeding of fissile isotopes resulting from the hardened neutron spectrum. Particularly, in Figures 7 and 8, the black line with circles represents the largest MFR of 2.0 with D2O coolant, and the green line with circles represents the lowest MFR of 0.65 with D2O coolant. The lower MFR of 0.65 yields an obviously smaller initial keff value but larger VC than that employing MFR = 2.0, while the harder neutron spectrum results in a more slowly decreasing keff and VCs and causes keff and VC values to intersect between 30 GWd/tU and 40 GWd/tU.
Figure 7
keff Comparison with different moderator-to-fuel ratios (MFRs) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 8
Void coefficient comparison with different moderator-to-fuel ratios (MFRs) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 3. ∆Fuelfissile comparison of different MFRs
MFR	H2O	D2O
2.0	−50.3	−12.9
1.22	−48.8	−11.0
1.02	−47.1	−9.7
0.83	−45.3	−8.7
0.65	−42.9	−8.0
Abbreviation: MFR, moderator-to-fuel ratio.
The remarkable breeding effects yielded by decreasing the MFR are fully presented in Table 3. As an example, ∆Fuelfissile is increased by 4.9% when the MFR is reduced from 2.0 to 0.65 for the D2O-cooled case.
However, the trade-off between the breeding effect and the safety issues raised by the VC is also obvious. As seen in Figure 8, decreasing the MFR from 2.0 to 0.65 for the D2O-cooled case causes the VC to gradually become positive. Considering that this calculation was carried out with a unit-cell model with zero neutron leakage, it is reasonable to expect negative VCs with an optimized 3D reactor design when the leakage takes effect.
To identify a feasible range of fuel enrichment for use in a 3D model, Figures 9 and 10 compare the keff and VCs and Table 4 tabulates the ∆Fuelfissile for various fuel enrichments of the 233U-ThO2 fueled unit cell. The MFR is set at 0.65 to ensure the most efficient fuel breeding. Three enrichments are considered: 10.0%, 15.0%, and 19.5%. 233U enrichment of 10.0% tends to yield high ∆Fuelfissile values with D2O fuel, particularly when MFR = 0.65, the ∆Fuelfissile loss is 8.0%. Taking into account both fissile isotope breeding and the potential of a negative VC, several 10.0% to 15.0% fuel enrichment scenarios are selected for the 3D calculations, aiming for a reasonably small burnup reactivity swing and a relatively low VC.
Figure 9
keff comparison with different 233U enrichments [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 10
Void coefficient comparison with different 233U enrichments [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 4. ∆Fuelfissile comparison of different fuel enrichments
Enrichment - %	Coolant Type	∆Fuelfissile
10.0	H2O	−42.9
D2O	−8.0
15.0	H2O	−33.3
D2O	−17.8
19.5	H2O	−27.4
D2O	−19.2
3 CONCEPTUAL DESIGN OF 3D REACTOR
The investigation on the 3D RMSMR is elaborated in this section. The purpose is to propose a conceptual design which is suitable for heating supply, seawater desalination, or deployment in outlying areas such as mountain area and islands. In this research, a 100-MWe power rating is selected to assure that the reactor delivers power suitable for the practical industrial application of interest and has the expected advantages of serial production and incremental deployment as well as the match to electric grid siting opportunities.27 Compared with the relatively short refueling periods (1~2 years) of current PWR-type SMRs, we expect that the epithermal-to-fast neutron spectrum in RMBWR can sustain a longer-than-5-years operation period due to the higher CR.
We establish the design based on existing PWR technology, thus a 17 × 17 PWR assembly with a pin pitch of 1.26 cm is adopted. Based on the above parametric study, D2O coolant and thorium dioxide fuel/blanket are selected, with the MFR of 0.65. This corresponds to the P/D ratio of 1.1, a diameter of 1.0455 cm for the seed fuel rod and blanket fuel pellet, and a 0.05-cm-thick zirconium cladding. A 2D schematic view of the assembly is illustrated in Figure 11. The seed assembly consists of 233U-ThO2 fuel rods with the enrichment value confined within 10.0% to 15.0%, according to previous parametric study. The blanket assembly is loaded with 232ThO2 for the breeding of the 233U isotope. Specifications for the control rod guide tubes and the instrument tube are standardized by reference to the literature.32
Figure 11
Schematic view of the seed and blanket assemblies [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Analyses and optimizations of a series of design concepts yield the basic reactor design parameters of the investigated system. A three-zone out-in seed assembly configuration is adopted to ensure a flat radial power distribution, with 233U enrichments of 11.0%, 12.5%, and 14.0%, respectively. To maximize the reactor's breeding capability, inner and outer blankets with pure 232Th oxide are incorporated radially, and axial blankets are attached to the top and bottom of the reactor core. Radial inner blanket assemblies are deployed at the center and at the peripheral positions. To ensure a negative VC, the axial core is arranged with a 100-cm seed fuel region and a 10-cm blanket region at the top and bottom, resulting in a strong leakage effect upon coolant voiding. A 40-cm upper plenum is included to accommodate the released fission gas. The radial and axial geometry of the RMSMR is shown in Figures 12 and 13. Owing to the slow variation of keff with depletion, the excess reactivity is suppressed simply by using control rods consisting of B4C material with 20% enrichment of 10B.
Figure 12
Radial schematic view of reduced-moderation small modular reactor (RMSMR) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 13
Axial schematic view of reduced-moderation small modular reactor (RMSMR) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The program MCNP634 with the ENDF/B-VII.0 library is used for 3D modeling to evaluate the neutronics properties of the proposed concepts. The CR as a function of time is calculated by the relationship
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4827:er4827-math-0003
in which urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4827:er4827-math-0004 and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4827:er4827-math-0005 are the microscopic capture and absorption neutron XSs of isotope i, respectively; Ni(t,r) is the number density of isotope i at time t, position r; and ∅(E,t,r) is the neutron flux at energy E, time t, and position r. The output of MCNP6 is processed by an in-house Python script to obtain CR(t).
Figure 14 presents the keff and CR variations versus time. The fuel temperature is taken as 900 K, and the coolant temperature is set as 600 K. It can be observed that the CR value is larger than 1.02 throughout the first year. Consequently, a notable increase in keff is observed at the early stage of the cycle, because the over-unity CR results in an increase in the fissile isotope inventory. The keff value begins to decline at around 2 years when the accumulation of FPs counteracts the fissile breeding. Also, the accumulation of FPs tends to render the neutron spectrum softer, leading to a reduction in CR over time. The reactor can sustain an operation period of around 7 years, with the EOC CR value of 0.85 and the averaged discharge burnup of 55.2 GWd/tU. The percentage of fissions caused by neutrons in the epithermal to fast (>0.625 keV) energy range is as high as 97% at BOC and remains over 80% even at EOC. At EOC, the blanket material contributes to approximately 35% of the total energy production.
Figure 14
keff and conversion ratio (CR) variations versus time [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
With a burnup reactivity swing of around 3200 pcm, the excess reactivity can be controlled by means of primary and secondary control systems deployed on the 12.5 wt% seed assembly region, as illustrated in Figure 12. The primary control system consists of a total of 24 control assemblies, loaded with 90% enrichment of 10B and divided in four groups in order to control the reactivity change during operation and to ensure reactor shutdown at cold zero power (CZP) state. The secondary control system is constituted by eight assemblies with 90% enrichment of 10B, which is able to shut down the reactor from any operating condition to the hot zero power (HZP) condition with the most reactive assembly inoperative. The reactivity balance from hot full power (HFP) to CZP at BOC is shown in Table 5. The temperature defect from HZP to CZP appears very large due to increase in the coolant density and the decreased coolant temperature, therefore an appreciable control rod worth of the primary control system is considered. Soluble boron could be a possible solution to alleviating the large control rod worth at cold state, but it adds to the economic cost since additional piping and the chemical volume control system are introduced.35 Additionally, utilization of burnable absorbers seems to be another promising solution.36
Table 5. Reactivity balance of control systems at BOC
Reactivity ($)	Primarya	Secondaryb
All rods in (ARI)	53.9	22.4
Highest control assembly worth	8.2	11.8
Real rod worth	45.6	10.6
Rod worth for criticality	9.0	-
Excess reactivity	3.3	3.3
Temperature defects	41.5	6.2
HZP → CZP	35.3	-
HFP → HZP	6.2	6.2
Shutdown margin	9.0	12.9
Abbreviations: BOC, beginning of cycle; CZP, cold zero power; HFP, hot full power; HZP, hot zero power.
a Evaluated from HFP to CZP.
b Evaluated from HFP to HZP.
Figure 15 presents the normalized radial power distribution at BOC, middle of cycle (MOC), and EOC. Figure 16 depicts the normalized axial power distributions. The axial offset (AO) of the reactor at BOC is estimated to be 0.11. The incorporation of the blanket assemblies tends to cause a power dip in the center of the core and a high power peaking factor at BOC, whereas with the conversion of 232Th to 233U, the peaking factor decreases rapidly with time. During the whole cycle, the power flattening effect causes the radial peaking factor to drop from 1.90 to 1.38 and the axial peaking factor to drop from 1.44 to 1.16. At BOC, the 3D power peaking factor presents a high value of 3.42. This can be partly alleviated by further optimizations to the assembly layout and the coolant flow distribution. 3D power peaking factors for MOC and EOC are 2.01, 1.76, respectively. Figure 17 compares the neutron spectrum of RMPWR with those of PWR and SFR at BOC. It can be seen clearly the use of D2O causes the neutron spectrum to shift from the thermal region to the epithermal-to-fast region.
Figure 15
Normalized radial power distribution of beginning of cycle (BOC), method of characteristics (MOC), and end of cycle (EOC) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 16
Normalized axial power distribution of beginning of cycle (BOC), method of characteristics (MOC), and end of cycle (EOC) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 17
Neutron spectra comparison of sodium fast reactor (SFR), PWR, and RMPWR at beginning of cycle (BOC) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
To estimate the safety performance of the reactor, the reactivity coefficients are evaluated accounting for the VC, the fuel temperature coefficient (FTC), and the coolant temperature coefficient (CTC). The VC is obtained by considering a 5% reduction in the coolant density of the active core, corresponding to a 5% coolant voiding. The FTC is computed as the reactivity change per Kelvin accounting for the difference between 900-K and 600-K fuel temperatures. The CTC is computed as the reactivity change per Kelvin accounting for the difference between 600-K and 300-K coolant temperatures. The reactivity coefficients can be evaluated as
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4827:er4827-math-0006
where urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4827:er4827-math-0007 and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er4827:er4827-math-0008 are the keff values obtained under the nominal state and the perturbed state, respectively. ∆pertubation is the amount of perturbation, that is, the density percentage change of the VC and temperature change of the FTC and CTC. Table 6 tabulates key reactor safety characteristics of the proposed design concept. In addition to the FTC and CTC, the VC also appears to be negative owing to the small core size and strong neutron leakage. These features are crucial for the safety of the proposed concept. Meanwhile, the VC value of −211.7 ± 0.2 pcm/%void at BOC also implies a large safety margin for expansion of the core without causing risk. For instance, the axial length can be further elongated for higher power output and enhanced economy. However, it is worthwhile to mention that the 233U fuel leads to a lower effective delayed neutron fraction (βeff) than a conventional 235U-fueled reactor,17 which might result in a worse response to rod ejection accidents. This may be somewhat mitigated by the much shorter neutron lifetime due to the harder neutron spectrum, which accelerates the response of Doppler feedback. In addition, a sufficiently large VC would also contribute to the reactor safety upon rod ejection accidents. It may be desirable to further optimize the deployment of the control rod to minimize the risk of such an accident.
Table 6. Reactor safety characteristics of RMSMR
Items	Values
Fuel temperature coefficient (pcm/K)	−6.4 ± 0.1
Coolant temperature coefficient (pcm/K)	−22.7 ± 0.1
Void reactivity coefficient (pcm/%void)
BOC	−211.7 ± 0.4
EOC	−105.8 ± 0.4
Reactivity for various void fractions (pcm)
20% void	BOC	−4287.2 ± 21.0
EOC	−2126.9 ± 26.0
50% void	BOC	−12 038.8 ± 23.0
EOC	−6272.6 ± 25.0
70% void	BOC	−18 335.0 ± 24.0
EOC	−10 609.6 ± 28.0
Effective delayed neutron fraction (pcm)
BOC	319.0 ± 21.0
EOC	307.0 ± 23.0
Prompt neutron generation time (μs)
BOC	12.1 ± 0.7
EOC	174.4 ± 2.7
Abbreviations: BOC, beginning of cycle; EOC, end of cycle; RMSMR, reduced-moderation small modular reactor.
To summarize, the basic reactor design parameters of the RMSMR are tabulated in Table 7. The total power output of the reactor is 300 MWth/100 MWe with the operation pressure of 15.5 MPa. The fresh core is loaded with 1.5 tons of 233U and 12.4 tons of 232Th, which ensures sufficient excess reactivity for 7 years without refueling. The coolant inlet temperature of 285°C and outlet temperature of 315°C ensure conditions similar to those of commercial PWRs. Based on the energy conservation law, the coolant flow rate is taken as around 1920 kg/s. Based on the thermal-hydraulic design parameters, the Reynolds number is 106 540, and the pressure drop of the core is estimated to be 4.9 kPa based on the Blasius correlation.
Table 7. Basic reactor design parameters of RMSMR
Items
Core thermal power/electric power (MW)	300/100
Pressure (MPa)	15.5
Pressure drop (kPa)	4.9
Core lifetime (years)	7
Core height (cm)	120
Equivalent diameter (cm)	364
Number of seed fuel assemblies	80
Number of blanket assemblies	41
Coolant type	Heavy water (D2O)
Fuel type	233U-232Th dioxide
Enrichment, %	11.0/12.5/14.0, 3 radial zones
Core 233U inventory (tHM)	1.5
Core 232Th inventory (tHM)	12.4
Average discharged burnup (MWd/tHM)
Seed assemblies	52.6
Blanket assemblies	100.5
Core inlet/outlet temperatures, °C	285/315
Coolant flow rate, kg/s	≈1920
Power density, W/cm3	≈82
Assembly geometry
Fuel pellet diameter (cm)	1.0455
Fuel pin diameter (cm)	1.1455
Number of pins/assembly	264 (17 × 17)
Moderator to fuel ratio	0.65
Abbreviation: RMSMR, reduced-moderation small modular reactor.
In general, the tight-lattice core reduces the critical heat flux and increases the pressure drop at the same mass velocity. To estimate the thermal-hydraulic safety features of the RMSMR, in this study, the minimum departure from nuclear boiling ratio (mDNBR) value is evaluated in an approximate manner. Due to the limited availability of DNBR correlations specifically for D2O in the literature, particularly with small P/D ratios, we adopt the W-3 formula,37 which is widely used for PWRs. It should be stated that the thermal-hydraulic parameters of the RMSMR might lie outside the scope of the W-3 formula, but this estimation will have referential value for assessment of the feasibility of the RMSMR design due to the similar thermal properties of D2O and H2O. The radial and axial power peaking factors are attained based on the forgoing neutronics calculations. The thermal-physical properties of heavy water are obtained from the NIST Chemistry WebBook.38 Based on forgoing neutronics calculations, the hot pin resides at the 14% seed assembly in the middle of two secondary control assemblies, with a total power of 33.7 kW and enthalpy rise of 362.7 kJ/kg. The enthalpy rise is estimated with the conservative uniform coolant flow distribution. The calculation with the W-3 formula yielded an mDNBR value of around 2.84, occurring at a height of 75 cm in the hot channel. Accounting for the tight-lattice layout and the uncertainty in thermal-hydraulic properties of D2O compared with H2O, this conservative mDNBR value ensures the feasibility of the RMSMR.
4 CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents the conceptual design of an innovative RMSMR for the sustainable use of nuclear resources. The concept is established with a particular emphasis on filling the gap between the traditional LWR technology and LMFR technology. Based on modifications of the widespread PWR technology, the RMSMR can sustain a continuous power output of 100 MWe for 7 years without refueling. A reduced-moderation heavy-water coolant is chosen to acquire an epithermal-to-fast neutron spectrum, which is beneficial for attaining an acceptable CR and for reducing the burnup reactivity swing throughout the core lifetime. Uranium-thorium dioxide fuel is used to ensure a negative VC, which is generally viewed as a crucial target for the reduced-moderation reactor concept. Systematic studies are conducted to reveal the neutronics influences of several important parameters, such as the coolant type, MFR, and fuel type, which are of reference value for further design and optimization of the reactor. The numerical modeling results show that the proposed reactor concept has satisfactory shutdown margins and reactivity coefficients and conservative thermal-hydraulic safety.
It should also be noted that further studies are required to enhance the feasibility of the reactor concept. The temperature defect from HZP to CZP appears very large due to the increased coolant density and decreased coolant temperature, leading to a large primary control rod worth. Optimizations to the control rod system layout and inclusion of burnable absorbers should be considered. In addition, as indicated by the VC values obtained above, a wide safety margin there seems to exist for increasing the core length while ensuring a reasonably negative VC. An increased active length implies higher power output, a longer core lifetime, and superior economy. Besides, the impacts of employing hexagonal-shaped assemblies to the CR and the safety features are worthy of further investigations. In addition, it will be interesting to assess the performance of more conventional nuclear fuels (eg, uranium oxide or plutonium oxide) within the same framework. In addition, more detailed considerations of the possibility of abnormal transients and accidents are advisable to consolidate the thermal-hydraulic feasibility of the RMSMR.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant 11805122) and Startup Fund for Youngman Research at SJTU. The authors would also like to gratefully acknowledge help provided by Professor Alain Hébert (Polytechnique Montréal) on the use of DRAGON code.
