<title>Phase Equilibria Studies of the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 System</title>
<author>Hames; Paulenova; Willit; Williamson</author>
<Affiliation>Oregon State University , 1500 Southwest Jefferson Street, Corvallis , Oregon 97331; Argonne National Laboratory , 9700 South Cass Avenue, Argonne , Illinois 60439</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2018.1448673</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00295450.2018.1448673</URL>
Abstract
Regions of the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 phase diagram used to represent the molten salt compositions generated during the electrorefining of used nuclear fuel were evaluated by studying the LiCl-UCl3 and KCl-UCl3 binary systems and several ternary mixtures. Phase transition temperatures of several binary and ternary mixtures made with LiCl, KCl, and UCl3 were measured by using differential scanning calorimetry. Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy was used to measure the gross compositions of the salt mixtures and X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to identify the phases formed after they were thermally cycled and had cooled to room temperature. The LiCl-UCl3 system has a eutectic transition at 763 ± 2 K for a mixture with 25 mol % UCl3. The KCl-UCl3 system has two eutectic transitions, one at 827 ± 3 K and another at 805 ± 4 K for mixtures with 19 mol % UCl3 and 57 mol % UCl3, respectively, and the congruently melting compound K2UCl5 was identified to have formed by XRD. The LiCl-UCl3 and KCl-UCl3 binary phase diagrams were developed and combined with the LiCl-KCl phase diagram to produce a portion of the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 phase diagram. The LiCl-KCl-UCl3 system includes two ternary eutectics, one occurring at 681 ± 6 K for the mixture with 33 mol % UCl3, 42.0 mol % LiCl, and 25 mol % KCl, and the other at 619 ± 1 K for the mixture with 8 mol % UCl3, 50.0 mol % LiCl, and 42 mol % KCl. The evaluation of these phase diagrams provides an improved understanding of the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 systems generated during electrorefining.
Keywords: Phase diagram;molten salt;differential scanning calorimetry
I. INTRODUCTION
Advanced pyroprocessing technology is being developed to recover and recycle actinides from used nuclear fuel and minimize the amounts and toxicity of wastes requiring disposal. In the first step of that process, molten LiCl-KCl-UCl3 salt electrolyte is used to dissolve and separate constituents of the used fuel based on their redox properties. Metallic uranium and a mixed uranium/transuranic (U/TRU) product are electrodeposited onto separate cathodes held at different potentials while other constituents remain dissolved in the salt or undissolved in a basket that serves as the anode and are treated in subsequent steps.1–3 The concentrations of fission products in the salt electrolyte increase as current is passed in the cell during the electrorefining step and UCl3 concentration gradients develop at the electrode-salt interfaces that may affect process efficiency. The thermodynamic properties of the salt electrolytes may also change as ternary and more complex compounds form. The formation of ternary compounds at electrode interfaces decreases the chemical activities and redox potentials of the uranium and TRU elements, which decreases the efficiency of electrorefining. Knowledge of the fundamental phase characteristics of the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 molten salt and how the behavior of the electrolyte changes with the salt composition is essential to maintaining optimal operating conditions throughout the electrorefining process. The goal of this work is to improve the accuracy of the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 system phase diagram.
We first considered the relevant LiCl-KCl, LiCl-UCl3, and KCl-UCl3 binary systems. Many researchers have characterized the LiCl-KCl system4–16 and recent assessments11–16 are in good agreement. Less information is available for the LiCl-UCl3 system, but results in the literature are consistent. The first known phase diagram for this system was produced by Barton et al. in 1959 (Ref. 17), who reported a single eutectic point at 763 ± 5 K for the composition with 25 mol % UCl3. In 1972, Desyatnik et al.18 reported a eutectic temperature of 763 ± 2 K for the composition with 26.5 mol % UCl3 and 73.5 mol % LiCl. Ghosh et al. used Gibbs energy modeling with data from Barton et al. and Desyatnik et al. to generate the LiCl-UCl3 phase diagram with a single eutectic at 765 K for the composition of 24.2 mol % UCl3 and 75.8 mol % LiCl (Ref. 16).
There is much less information available for the KCl-UCl3 system. This system was first studied by Kraus in 1943 (Ref. 19), who reported two eutectic compositions and the appearance of an additional feature in the cooling curves of compositions made with less than 33.3 mol % UCl3 that was attributed to the conversion of K3UCl6 to K2UCl5 (Refs. 19 and 20).
A study by Thoma et al.20 showed inconsistencies with the phase diagram of Kraus. Thoma et al. included excess uranium metal in the mixtures of KCl-UCl3 they studied to minimize the presence of U4+, which they had concluded was the cause of the feature attributed to the K3UCl6 in the Kraus diagram. Thoma et al. reported two eutectics, but did not see the K3UCl6 phase. A “eutectic break” was reported to occur for compositions with more than 55 mol % UCl3; the cause was unknown.
Desyatnik et al. studied the KCl-UCl3 system with differential thermal analysis (DTA) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) and reported the existence of K2UCl5 and two eutectic compositions.18
Suglobova et al. used thermographic methods and XRD to study systems of alkali metal chlorides with UCl3. They reported two eutectics and suggested solid solution formation of K3UCl6, with decomposition of that phase to K2UCl5 and KCl occurring at low temperatures.21
Ghosh et al. used the data of Kraus, Suglobova and Chirkst, and Thoma et al. to examine the KCl-UCl3 system using computer coupling of phase diagrams and thermochemistry (CALPHAD). Ghosh et al. determined that the K3UCl6 phase did not exist based on the absence of peaks in XRD analyses and excluded K3UCl6 from the calculations. Ghosh et al. calculated two eutectic compositions: eutectic e3 at 18.6 mol % UCl3 melting at 847 K and eutectic e2 at 54 mol % UCl3 melting 831 K (Ref. 16).
While results in the literature are consistent regarding the presence of two eutectics in the KCl-UCl3 system, the exact compositions of these eutectics and their melting temperatures are uncertain. Furthermore, the existence of the K3UCl6 phase is inconclusive. We have addressed these discrepancies in the KCl-UCl3 system experimentally by using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) to assess a wide range of mixtures.
The LiCl-KCl-UCl3 system was first investigated by Thamer, who used cooling curve data from DTA to determine the phase transition temperatures in samples with high uranium concentrations and excess metallic U to ensure the absence of UCl4 (Ref. 22). Thamer reported one eutectic in the high uranium concentration region of the diagram with the solidifying phases LiCl, UCl3, and K2UCl5 (Ref. 22).
Desyatnik and Dubinin also studied the ternary system.23 They used literature values of liquidus transitions in the LiCl-KCl (Ref. 7), LiCl-UCl3 (Ref. 24), and KCl-UCl3 (Ref. 18) binary phase diagrams along with experimental results to calculate the ternary system. They reported four solidifying phases (LiCl, KCl, K2UCl5, and UCl3) and two simple eutectics for the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 system.23
Nakayoshi et al. studied the LiCl-KCl eutectic-UCl3 system and developed a partial phase diagram for the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 system to determine the temperature at which an electrolyte would crystallize during accidental cooling of the electrorefiner.25 The exact eutectic temperatures and compositions were not reported.
Ghosh et al. used data of Nakayoshi et al. and Thamer with experimental results for samples of the LiCl-KCl eutectic containing two different UCl3 concentrations in CALPHAD simulations. Two eutectic compositions were reported with a monovarient eutectic reaction at 746 K between the LiCl-KCl eutectic and 18 mol % UCl3 (Ref. 16).
While previous studies showed that the liquidus ternary diagram includes boundary lines for the LiCl-K2UCl5-UCl3 and LiCl-KCl-K2UCl5 systems, the eutectic compositions and temperatures measured for those systems are inconsistent.16,22,23,25 Because this ternary system is being used to model the behavior of electrolyte in the electrorefiner, we have performed experiments to better define the eutectics and identify stable compounds in the region of the diagram important to electrorefiner operation.
II. EXPERIMENTAL
II.A. Preparation of Salt Mixtures
Mixtures of pure reagents were used for measurements made to generate binary and ternary phase diagrams. The high purity LiCl (99.999%) and KCl (99.99%) reagents were purchased (Aldrich) and the UCl3 was produced by chlorinating purified U metal in an argon atmosphere glove box as follows. Purified uranium metal that was generated in previous electrorefining tests and reagent NH4Cl (99.99% purity from Sigma Aldrich) were loaded into a closed-end quartz tube that served as the reaction vessel at a ratio of about 6 NH4Cl:1 UCl3 to facilitate complete conversion of the metal U. The quartz tube was placed in a furnace and the open end was connected to a large Pyrex tube (the junction was sealed by a Viton O-ring) that was connected by a stopcock and hose to a vacuum to remove vapors produced during the reaction. The vessel was heated under vacuum to 573 K for 30 h to synthesize (NH4)2UCl6. Samples of the resulting bright green material were characterized by DSC and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), which indicated the (NH4)2UCl6 decomposed to UCl4 and NH4Cl at 608 K. Therefore, the (NH4)2UCl6 product was decomposed at 623 K for 10 h under vacuum to sublime the NH4Cl from the sample and leave the desired olive green UCl4 product. The conversion was confirmed by XRD and DSC.
The UCl4 product was placed into a nickel crucible with uranium metal and heated at 823 K for 10 h under vacuum to reduce the UCl4 to UCl3. Previous experiments showed that performing the reduction directly in the quartz tube gave a final product having substantial oxychloride contamination, whereas use of a nickel crucible was found to result in a purer product. The final product was analyzed by DSC and XRD to confirm it was UCl3.
II.B. Differential Scanning Calorimetry–Thermogravimetric Analysis
Mixtures of LiCl and KCl were made with a range of UCl3 concentrations to generate data used to construct the phase diagrams. Mixtures of carefully measured amounts of high-purity reagent LiCl and KCl were ground together with UCl3 by using a mortar and pestle in an argon atmosphere glove box because the salts are hygroscopic. The masses were measured to the nearest 0.0001 g and used to calculate the composition of each mixture as mole percent of each reagent salt. About 10 mg of each mixture was loaded into a gold pan that was then hermetically sealed to avoid loss of sample due to volatilization during thermal cycling. Gold pans were used as crucibles because gold is inert to these salt systems. The samples were thermally analyzed with DTA, DSC, and TGA using a Netzsch STA 449 C Jupiter instrument housed inside the argon glove box. The sample crucible and an empty reference crucible were situated on a platinum sample carrier in contact with a Type S thermocouple. The samples were first thermally cycled at a rate of 20 K·min−1 to initiate melting and promote homogeneity of the sample. Two thermal cycles were then run at a rate of 5 K·min−1 to measure the transition temperatures of the material. Two consecutive cycles were run to verify the instrument was stable during the measurements. The data were analyzed to determine transition temperatures by using the Netzsch Proteus Analysis software.
II.C. Post-Test Salt Analysis
Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) was used to determine the cation ratios in most of the salt samples after thermal analysis experiments. The crucibles containing the salts were removed from the glove box and cut open to recover the salt, which was dissolved in a nitric acid solution that was then diluted to make a 50.0-mL solution for analysis. The solutions were analyzed by using a Perkin Elmer Optima 8300 ICP-OES to determine the U, K, and Li concentrations. The Li/U and K/U concentration ratios were used to calculate the mole fractions of the chlorides. The relative uncertainties in the concentration ratios ranged between about 0.2% and 3% of the ratio value and were about the same for the Li/U and K/U ratios in each salt. The average uncertainty for all the analyses was 0.72% for both ratios. Ignoring the trace amounts of contaminants, the uncertainties in the salt contents in the binary and ternary salt mixtures are assigned values of 1 and 2 mol %, respectively.
A few samples were analyzed after the DSC experiments by using XRD to identify compounds formed during thermal cycling. A sample was loaded onto a single-well glass slide that had been covered with double-sided tape. A Kapton film was then placed over the sample and sealed to the tape to prevent radiological contamination. The slide with the contained sample was removed from the glove box and analyzed.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
III.A. LiCl-UCl3 System
Figure 1 displays a DSC curve for one thermal cycle of a sample composition 87 mol % LiCl and 13 mol % UCl3. The eutectic temperature was determined to be 763 K by extrapolating the onset temperature of the eutectic peak to the baseline, as shown by the auxiliary lines.26 The liquidus temperature was taken as the onset temperature of the baseline shift in the heating curve (red) that occurs at about 825 K (Refs. 25 and 26). The DSC cooling curve (blue) indicates transition temperatures that are about 20 K lower than seen in the heating curve (e.g., 803 K compared to 825 K), which may indicate supercooling. Therefore, we only used the heating curves to determine the phase transition temperatures.
Fig. 1. DSC curves for a sample with 13.2 mol % UCl3 and 86.8 mol % KCl. The heating curve is shown in red and the cooling curve is shown in blue.
The transition temperatures from the DSC measurements for LiCl-UCl3 and the derived phase diagram (black curves) are shown in Fig. 2. The size of the data point indicates the composition uncertainty of ±1 mol % for all mixtures based on analyses made after the DSC measurements. The phase diagram in Fig. 2 shows the eutectic composition is 25 mol % UCl3 and 75 mol % LiCl and the solidus transition occurs at 763 ± 2 K based on results for all salt mixtures. We refer to the LiCl-UCl3 eutectic as eutectic e1. The uncertainty in the solidus temperature represents one standard deviation of the temperatures measured for the samples used to derive the phase diagram. Three phase diagrams from the literature (dashed curves) are included for comparison16–18 and the compositions and temperatures measured for the eutectic transition are compiled in Table I. The phase diagram based on our results is consistent with these other diagrams.
TABLE I Experimental Results and Literature Values of Eutectic Composition and Melting Temperature for the LiCl-UCl3 System
Fig. 2. LiCl-UCl3 phase diagram drawn for data from DSC analyses (symbols) compared with phase diagrams by Barton et al. (blue),17 and Desyatnik et al. (orange),18 and Ghosh et al. (red)16 represented by dashed lines.
III.B. KCl-UCl3 System
Twenty mixtures of KCl-UCl3 were thermally analyzed by using DSC. After thermal analysis was completed, the U and K concentrations were measured for most samples by using ICP-OES and the phase contents of the other samples were determined using XRD. The phase diagram drawn from the transition temperatures determined from the DSC heating curves and the measured compositions is given in Fig. 3. We found one eutectic (referred to as eutectic e2) to occur at 57 ± 2 mol % UCl3 and 43 ± 2 mol % KCl with melting at 805 ± 4 K and another eutectic (eutectic e3) to occur at 19 ± 2 mol % UCl3 and 81 ± 2 mol % KCl with melting at 827 ± 3 K. The eutectic temperatures are based on the solidus temperatures measured for the sets of mixtures on either side of congruently melting K2UCl5. The eutectic compositions and temperatures are compared to literature values in Table II. The eutectic transitions observed in this study are consistent with those measured by Thoma et al.,20 but both differ from the values reported by Suglobova and Chirkst21 and Desyatnik and Dubinin.24 Thoma et al. used nickel crucibles that do not interact with the KCl-UCl3 system but Suglobova and Chirkst and Desyatnik and Dubinin both used quartz crucibles that can interact with the molten salt at high temperatures and contaminate it with oxychlorides.
TABLE II Experimental Results and Literature Values for Eutectic Compositions and Melting Temperatures in the KCl-UCl3 System
Fig. 3. KCl-UCl3 phase diagram drawn from DSC heating curve data.
Kraus19 and Suglobova and Chirkst21 both used cooling data to develop their phase diagrams and reported an extra feature in results for mixtures with <25 mol % UCl3 that they attributed to the presence of K3UCl6 (Refs. 19 and 21). We did not see spurious features in our DSC results, but evaluated our XRD results for evidence of K3UCl6. Figure 4 displays a portion of the XRD pattern of our sample with 10.8 mol % UCl3 and 89.9 mol % KCl. Reference peaks for KCl, K2UCl5, and K3UCl6 standards are shown as vertical lines. The measured pattern is uniformly shifted to slightly higher values of 2θ relative to the reference peaks, but includes peaks that clearly correspond to KCl and K2UCl5. (We attribute the shift to imperfect alignment of the small sample during the XRD analysis.) Although several peaks of the K3UCl6 and K2UCl5 references overlap, no peaks are observed in the pattern for our sample that correspond to the few isolated K3UCl6 peaks (e.g., at 27.5 and 36 deg). We conclude that K3UCl6 is not present in our sample at a detectable level.
Fig. 4. Portion of the XRD results for a sample of 10.8 mol % UCl3 and 89.2 mol % KCl after thermally cycling by DSC. The XRD scan is in black and reference peaks are represented by lines for K3UCl6 (blue lines with solid arrows), KCl (green lines with open arrows), and K2UCl5 (red lines with no arrows).
Thoma et al. speculated that the feature attributed to K3UCl6 by Krauss instead was generated by disproportionation of UCl3 to U and UCl4 upon melting. To determine if disproportionation occurred in our materials, we heated a mixture of 11 mol % UCl3 and 89 mol % KCl in a Ni crucible to 1073 K. After cooling to room temperature, the material was analyzed by XRD to determine if K2UCl6 or U metal was generated, which would provide evidence of disproportionation. Neither K3UCl6, K2UCl6, nor metallic U were detected. Based on the absence of disproportionation products and that no spurious thermal effects were observed in the DSC analysis indicating the presence of K2UCl6, we believe that disproportionation is not significant in this system and does not affect the phase assemblage.
Additional experiments were performed to determine if K3UCl6 could be produced in the UCl3-KCl system during the DSC measurements. Samples of a mixture of 10 mol % UCl3 and 90 mol % KCl were placed in two crucibles and heated to above the melting point. One of the mixtures was then quenched to room temperature and the other was allowed to cool to a temperature below the eutectic temperature and held at that temperature overnight to promote the formation of K3UCl6. Only K2UCl5 and KCl were detected in the diffraction pattern of each sample with no evidence of K3UCl6. Another test was performed to see if K3UCl6 formed after a long anneal to generate a detectable peak in the DSC curves. Only the eutectic and liquidus transitions were seen in the heating and cooling curves, with no features indicating K3UCl6 formation.
The DSC profiles for five of the KCl and UCl3 mixtures that were used to generate the phase diagram displayed additional thermal features in the cooling profiles. As an example, Fig. 5 shows results for analysis of the 10.8 mol % UCl3 and 89.2 mol % KCl sample. Melting occurred at about 820 K when that sample was first thermally cycled at 5 K·min−1 (pink curve), but two distinguishable peaks appeared at about 827 K and 810 K in the cooling curve (green curve). When the same sample was thermally cycled at a rate of 2 K·min−1, the heating curve (red curve) and cooling curve (blue curve) showed the same higher temperature peaks near 820 K, but the lower temperature peak in the cooling curve (blue) was shifted to a higher temperature just below the high temperature peak. The two peaks nearly merged into a single peak. All of the samples that displayed this effect upon cooling weighed less than 10 mg. It is possible that when these small samples melted, the liquid formed separate small droplets within the sealed gold crucible, which could have caused thermal lags due to the size and efficiency of heat transfer with the crucible. Lowering the cooling rate decreased the difference in responses of the individual droplets such that they merged to form one peak. Droplet formation and thermal lag did not affect the heating curves that we used to determine the transition temperatures. However, this suggests droplet formation can lead to spurious peaks in the cooling curves that could be misidentified as separate phase transitions.
Fig. 5. DSC curves for a sample with 10.8 mol % UCl3 and 89.2 mol % KCl cycled at two rates. The heating curve for the rate of 5 K·min−1 is shown in pink, while the cooling curve is shown in green. The heating curve for the rate of 2 K·min−1 is shown in red, while the cooling curve is shown in blue.
III.C. LiCl-KCl-UCl3 System
The ternary phase diagram in Fig. 6 was drawn by combining the LiCl-KCl binary diagram of Sangster and Pelton12 (which indicates eutectic e4 occurs at about 40 mol % KCl) with the LiCl-UCl3 and KCl-UCl3 binary diagrams generated in this study that provide eutectics e1, e2, and e3. Two ternary eutectics were identified: eutectic E1 at 33 ± 2 mol % UCl3, 42 ± 2 mol % LiCl, and 25 ± 2 mol % KCl melting at 681 ± 6 K and eutectic E2 at 8 ± 2 mol % UCl3, 50 ± 2 mol % LiCl, and 42 ± 2 mol % KCl melting at 619 ± 1 K. Ten LiCl-KCl-UCl3 mixtures were analyzed with DSC and values derived from their heating curves were used to verify the features of this diagram. After the samples were thermally analyzed, the salt compositions were analyzed by ICP-OES. The measured compositions are plotted on the phase diagram in Fig. 6. Table III compares the eutectics measured in this study with values in the literature. Values for eutectic E1 are similar but the composition and melting temperature of eutectic E2 differ from the literature values, which are not in agreement with one another.
TABLE III Measured and Literature Values of Eutectic Compositions and Melting Temperatures for the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 System
Fig. 6. LiCl-KCl-UCl3 liquidus projection drawn from binary phase diagrams for LiCl-KCl (Ref. 12) and for LiCl-UCl3 and KCl-UCl3 from this study. Data points show compositions of ten ternary mixtures evaluated to confirm the diagram.
The line extending from 100% LiCl to K2UCl5 in Fig. 6 is known as the alkmeade line. All compositions on the right of the alkemeade line will transition through eutectic E1 and all compositions to the left of the alkemeade line will transition through eutectic E2. For example, Fig. 7 shows the DSC heating curve for a sample with a composition 67.9 mol % UCl3, 4.8 mol % LiCl, and 27.3 mol % KCl, which lies on the eutectic E1 side of the alkemeade line (that composition is shown by the red circle in Fig. 6). The heating curve displays endothermic peaks at 681 K and 803 K and a baseline shift at 949 K. The first endothermic peak at 681 K occurs at the temperature of the ternary eutectic E1 in the diagram shown in Fig. 6. The liquid is enriched in LiCl relative to the starting composition, but has a similar KCl and UCl3 ratio. The endothermic transition occurring at 803 K corresponds with melting of the eutectic K2UCl5 + UCl3 mixture at eutectic e2. Further heating results in continued melting until the salt becomes completely molten above the liquidus temperature of 949 K.
Fig. 7. DSC heating curve for a sample of 67.9 mol % UCl3, 4.8 mol % LiCl, and 27.3 mol % KCl.
The sample made with about 20 mol % UCl3, 12 mol % LiCl, and 68 mol % KCl was analyzed by XRD after it was thermally cycled. As seen in Fig. 8, the thermally cycled material is composed of K2UCl5, KCl, and LiCl. The measured peaks are shifted to slightly lower 2θ values relative to the standards peaks due to imperfect positioning of the sample during analysis or small sample size.
Fig. 8. Portion of the XRD results for a sample with about 20 mol % UCl3, 12 mol % LiCl, and 68 mol % KCl after DSC analysis. The XRD scan is in black and reference peaks are represented by lines for LiCl (blue lines with solid arrows), KCl (green lines with open arrows), and K2UCl5 (red lines with no arrows).
We now present a brief example of how the ternary phase diagram is being applied to electrorefining studies. In a recent uranium polarization experiment, a K2UCl5 film was postulated to have formed on the anode that reduced the current density and generated a passive region of overpotential at the anode.27 Figure 9 shows an isothermal projection of the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 ternary phase diagram at 773 K, which is near the normal operating temperature of the electrorefiner. The projection shows K2UCl5 is stable in mixtures formed at high uranium concentrations. Specifically, the behavior observed at the uranium anode–electrolyte interface during the uranium electrorefining experiment can be attributed to the formation of K2UCl5. In addition, the binary diagram shown in Fig. 3 indicates that K2UCl5 will remain a solid at temperatures up to 905 K.
Fig. 9. Isothermal projection of the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 system at 773 K.
IV. SUMMARY
Phase diagrams for the LiCl-UCl3 and KCl-UCl3 binary systems were evaluated to support development of the LiCl-KCl-UCl3 ternary system phase diagram. The phase diagram measured for the LiCl-UCl3 system is consistent with those in the literature with a eutectic transition at 25 ± 2 mol % UCl3 and 75 ± 2 mol % LiCl with melting at 763 ± 2 K. The measured phase diagram for the KCl-UCl3 system displayed eutectic transitions at 19 ± 2 mol % UCl3 and 81 ± 2 mol % KCl melting at 827 ± 3 K and at 57 ± 2 mol % UCl3 and 43 ± 2 mol % KCl melting at 805 ± 4 K. The formation of K2UCl5 was confirmed by XRD and melting was observed at 905 K in DSC analyses, but there was no evidence that K3UCl6 formed, nor could it be generated in the KCl-UCl3 system. However, spurious peaks were detected in the cooling curves of DSC analyses conducted with small samples that are attributed to efficiency of heat transfer with the crucible. Measurements with mixtures of LiCl-KCl-UCl3 were consistent with the phase diagram generated by combining the measured LiCl-UCl3 and KCl-UCl3 binary diagrams with the LiCl-KCl binary from the literature. The ternary system has two eutectics: E1 at 33 ± 2 mol % UCl3, 42 ± 2 mol % LiCl, and 25 ± 2 mol % KCl melting at 681 ± 6 K and E2 at 8 ± 2 mol % UCl3, 50 ± 2 mol % LiCl, and 42 ± 2 mol % LiCl melting at 619 ± 1 K. The derived ternary diagram is being used to understand the electrochemical reprocessing of used nuclear fuel.
Acknowledgments
This paper has been created by U Chicago Argonne, LLC, operator of Argonne National Laboratory (Argonne). Argonne, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science laboratory, is operated under contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. The authors thank S. Naik and D. Graczyk for salt composition analyses and T. Cruse for assistance with XRD analyses. The U.S. Government retains for itself, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government. Argonne’s work was supported by the DOE’s Office of Nuclear Energy, under contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
