<title>Modification of PDMS with acrylic acid and acrylic acid/ethylene glycol dimethacrylate by simultaneous polymerization assisted by gamma radiation</title>
<author>Velazco Medel M.A.; Camacho Cruz L.A.; Bucio E.</author>
<Affiliation>Malaysia-Japan International Institute of Technology, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Jalan Sultan Yahya Petra, 54100, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia；Center of Hydrogen Energy, Institute of Future Energy, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Jalan Sultan Yahya Petra, 54100, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia；Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Petronas, Bandar Seri Iskandar, 31750, Tronoh, Perak, Malaysia；Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Chemical and Energy Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310, Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia；Radiation Processing Technology Division, Malaysian Nuclear Agency, 43000, Kajang, Selangor, Malaysia</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2020.108754</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0969806X19314318?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•
PDMS was modified via simultaneous radiation method with AAc/EGDMA.
•
The effect of radiation dose and concentration of monomer were evaluated.
•
Successful grafts with various degrees of crosslinking were obtained.
•
pH-responsiveness was evaluated using pH titrations.
•
Hydrophilicity studies demonstrated the presence of the graft.
Abstract
The addition of hydrophilic functional groups to hydrophobic polymers has been extensively used for the development of new medical devices with potential applications both for antibacterial substrates and for biocompatible materials. Having this into account, this work sought to modify PDMS films by grafting a copolymer of acrylic acid and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (AAc/EGDMA) to increase the hydrophilicity of the films, and thus modifying the swelling properties of PDMS in water. The effect of the molar ratio between AAc/EGDMA and the crosslinking of these grafted groups on the properties of these materials was evaluated by performing swelling studies both in water and pH buffer solutions and contact angle measurements. Potentiometric titrations were employed to estimate acid group availability on the PDMS-g-(AAc-co-EGDMA) films with different grafting yields.
Keywords
Polydimethylsiloxane；Grafting；pH responsiveness；Crosslinking；Swelling；Hydrophilicity
1. Introduction
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is an organosilicon polymer which is also commonly known as silicone rubber. Materials based on PDMS are critical in the development of biomedical devices due to their high biocompatibility, poor hydrophilicity, and useful mechanical properties such as its glass transition temperature (Tg) and high moduli (Abbasi et al., 2002). Even when the properties of PDMS are very convenient, the modification of this material to improve its characteristics and to add uses to PDMS substrates has been vastly explored (Pinto et al., 2010; Li et al., 2012). One of the most useful approaches for modifying polymer matrixes is the grafting of additional molecules which may contain functional groups that enhance the properties of the original matrix. The grafted groups may be either small molecules or macromolecules with different functionalities and microstructures (Flores-Rojas et al., 2017; Lee and Vörös, 2005).
PDMS has been previously modified by grafting macromolecules that may swell upon changes on the chemical environment (pH, temperature, etc.). These functional macromolecules include mixed-responsive polymers which add multiple characteristics to the modified matrix. Block-copolymers and terpolymers have also been grafted onto PDMS, in these examples each section of the copolymer responds to specific stimuli, conferring further applications to these polymeric materials (Flores-Rojas et al., 2018).
One important strategy for the modification of polymeric matrices has been the use of ionizing radiation (Jaganathan et al., 2015; Cao et al., 2017; Pino-Ramos et al., 2018) because this procedure involves the use of mild reaction conditions and it avoids the use of chemical initiators which often contaminate the final product. Through this method, when a material interacts with ionizing radiation, unstable radical groups are formed within the material which then may lead to conventional free-radical polymerizations. Through this method good results have been obtained for polymer grafting in many matrices, including PDMS (Keshvari et al., 2008; Valencia-Mora et al., 2016; Melendez-Ortiz et al., 2015). There exist two main methods to modify a polymeric substrate using ionizing radiation: Simultaneous/direct method and oxidative pre-irradiation. The first method involves the interaction of the whole reaction system (polymer matrix + monomers + solvent) with ionizing radiation to produce reactive sites within the polymer matrix which then allow for the graft polymerization to take place. Oxidative pre-irradiation, on the other hand, involves the interaction of just the polymer matrix with the radiation in presence of oxygen to form unstable organic peroxides and hydroperoxides that may be later cleaved in the presence of a monomer to initiate a polymerization reaction. In both methods, the presence of reactive radical groups in solution may form both grafted polymer chains and homopolymer chains.
Poly(acrylic acid) (PAAc) is extensively used due to its impressive absorbent properties and its acid-base behavior. Both the monomer and its corresponding polymer have carboxylic acid groups that allow the formation of hydrogen bonds between polymer chains (when the pH is below its pKa value of ~4.5); nevertheless, when the pH is above the pKa value for the acid groups, the polymer structure is now composed of carboxylate groups which promote chain-chain repulsion which allows for the absorption of water and greater swelling properties. Acrylic acid (AAc) has been grafted onto PDMS by different initiation methods (Keshvari et al., 2008; Wei et al., 2008; Lee et al., 1996; Shahsavan et al., 2015; Salati et al., 2011); however, when using ionizing radiation, the grafting of this monomer has only been studied by using the oxidative pre-irradiation pathway (Yang and Hsiue, 1996; Yang and Hou, 2011; García-Vargas et al., 2014; Cabana et al., 2017). This is due to the high reactivity of AAc, that causes the formation of high amounts of PAAc homopolymer and low amounts of grafted macromolecules.
Ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA) has been used as cross-linking agent to create controlled-shape polymers with 3D-structures. This monomer has been previously combined with AAc to form crosslinked copolymers with high swelling that confers them the property of retaining small molecules or even larger macromolecules like proteins. (Akhtar et al., 2015; Shafiei et al., 2017). Although EGDMA is extremely stable in neutral media, at basic pH, ester hydrolysis occurs slowly. The hydrolysis of different acrylic and methacrylic esters has been reported (Orekhov et al., 2018; Fujisawa and Kadoma, 2012) and this characteristic may be used for drug delivery systems. Previously, a binary poly(ethylene glycol dimethacrylate-co-glycidyl methacrylate) copolymer was grafted using gamma radiation into PDMS (PDMS-g-(EGDMA-co-GMA)) by Flores-Rojas and Bucio, 2016. In this work they showed that by decreasing the ratio of EGDMA/GMA, the grafting yield increases considerably due to the high reactivity of glycidyl methacrylate that promotes homopolymer formation rather than grafting reaction. This last fact may be a potential solution for the poor grafts of AAc that have been observed onto PDMS.
Considering the potential reactivity improvements and the applications of this crosslinking agent, we were interested in the use this bi-ester to obtain PDMS modified with EGDMA and AAc thorugh direct irradiation. Variable reactions (see Table 1) conditions were used to evaluate the effect of varying the ratio AAc/EGDMA in the grafting yields, and how this affected the acid-base properties of the materials. To fulfill these objectives, swelling behavior, potentiometric titrations, and wettability tests were performed to the materials.
Table 1. AAc/EGDMA ratio in the different modified PDMS films.
ID	AAc/EGDMA ratio
PDMS-g-AAc	PDMS-g-AAc	1:0
PDMS-g-(AAc-co-EGDMA)	PDMS-1	1:1
PDMS-2	2:1
PDMS-3	3:1
PDMS-4	4:1
PDMS-5	5:1
P(AAc-co-EGDMA)	P(AAc-co-EGDMA)	1:1
2. Experimental section
2.1. Materials
PDMS films (1 × 4 cm) with a density ranging from 1.1 to 1.5 g cm-3 and a thickness of 1 mm were purchased from Good-fellow (Huntingdon, UK). Ethylene glycol dimethacrylate and acrylic acid were acquired from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (St Louis MO, USA). All the monomers were purified under vacuum distillation before used. Toluene (analytical grade) was obtained from Baker Mexico and was used without further purification. Buffer solutions were prepared using sodium phosphate, boric acid, sodium carbonate, and citric acid purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (St Louis MO, USA).
2.2. Radiation polymerization
PDMS-films were introduced in an ampoule containing 10 mL of an AAc/EGDMA mixture varying between 5 to 50% (v/v) in toluene as a solvent, the monomer ratio (AAc/EGDMA) was modified also to check the concentration effect of EGDMA in the stability and pH-response of the grafted-films. Then, the ampoules were degassed by freeze-thaw cycles (4 times each 10 min), subsequently the ampoules were sealed and later exposed to variable doses of 60Co γ-radiation using a Gammabeam 651PT available in the Institute of Nuclear Sciences (ICN) at the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) to initiate the polymerization reaction.
After exposing the films to radiation, the grafted PDMS films (PDMS-g-(AAc-co-EGDMA)) were washed in different solvents to remove occluded solvent, monomer and copolymer residues. To assure that no toluene or monomer residues remained in the grafted films, the films were washed up to 5 times with deionized water until no visible precipitated toluene was observed and the swelling of PDMS due to its interaction with toluene was negligible. Finally, the samples were dried under vacuum (-80 kPa) at 50 °C and weighed.
The grafting yield (GY) was calculated from weight difference between pristine PDMS (W0) and grafted-PDMS (Wg), the general formula is shown in Eq. (1):
(Eq. 1)GY (%)= [(Wg – W0)/W0 ]100
The same procedure was employed to prepare PDMS-g-AAc films. The monomer concentrations and absorbed doses were varied to compare grafting yields under a varying set of conditions. All the experiments were repeated thrice and the standard error of the mean (SEM) was calculated for all measurements.
2.3. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy-attenuated total reflectance spectroscopy (FTIR-ATR)
FTIR-ATR spectra of materials were obtained using a PerkinElmer Spectrum 100 spectrometer (Perkin Elmer Cetus Instruments, Norwalk, CT) with 16 scans. All the materials were dried under vacuum prior to the measurements.
2.4. Thermal analysis
For further characterization, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) studies were performed to the samples. TGA measurements were carried out on a TAinstruments TGA Q50 ramping from 25 to 800 °C at a heating rate 10 °C/min under a nitrogen atmosphere. DSC analysis was performed in a TAinstruments 2010 DSC calorimeter, the thermal history and the occluded solvent of the samples were removed with a pre-heating cycle ramping up from 25 to 100 °C at 10 °C/min under a nitrogen atmosphere with a second heating ramp from 25 to 350 °C at 10 °C/min. All the materials were dried under vacuum prior to the measurements.
2.5. Contact angle
A Kruss DSA 100 drop shape analyzer (Matthews NC, USA) was used to measure the contact angle of the films with water. The contact angle was recorded at 5 and 10 min after a bi-distilled water droplet had been deposited onto the dry samples. All the experiments were repeated thrice and the standard error of the mean (SEM) was calculated for all measurements.
2.6. Equilibrium water content and swelling behavior
Ionic solutions with varying ionic strengths were tested to evaluate the swelling behavior of the PDMS-films. The equilibrium water content (EWC%) was measured in three different environments: deionized water, in a 0.13 M NaCl solution, and in a phosphate buffer solution at pH = 7.4 (simulating blood environment). pH-responsiveness of the PDMS-films was evaluated by measuring the swelling degree in buffer solutions with pH values ranging from 2 to 10 (2-3: H3PO4/NaH2PO4, 4-5: H2CO3/NaHCO3, 6-7: NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4 and 8-10: B(OH)3/Na2B4O7) during 48 h each, the excess of water was removed using filter paper and then the films were weighted. The swelling degree (SD) was calculated using the Equation (2):
(Eq. 2)SD (%)= [(WS – Wg)/Wg ]100
Wg and Ws represent the mass of the grafted and the swollen film respectively. All the experiments were repeated thrice and the standard error of the mean (SEM) was calculated for all measurements.
2.7. Potentiometric titrations
Potentiometric pH titrations were performed using a HANNA HI4212 potentiometer with a combined glass pH electrode (HANNA HI 1331B) that was calibrated through a standard three-point calibration using Fisher Scientific reference pH buffers (pH=4.0, 7.0, 10.0). A constant mass of functionalized PDMS was weighed (~0.2 g) and placed in DI water in constant stirring. KOH 0.01 mol/L was slowly added until reaching an added base volume of twice the volume needed to reach the equivalence point while monitoring the pH with the potentiometer. The initial pH of the titration was manually set to a value of two for all samples.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Preparation of PDMS-g-AAc and PDMS-g-(AAc-co-EGDMA)
All PDMS-g-(AAc-co-EGDMA) films were prepared by the simultaneous irradiation method by varying the monomer ratio, the concentration of the monomers, the solvent, and the absorbed dose, aiming to analyze the effect of the EGDMA concentration in the hydrophilic properties of modified PDMS. PDMS-g-AAc films were prepared by the simultaneous method as control samples to compare their response with the binary films and to set a precedent for the preparation of these materials by the direct irradiation method. Additionally, residual copolymer: P(AAc-co-EGDMA) was isolated from PDMS-1 both at 10 and 50 kGy and 10% v/v reaction conditions for further comparisons.
For the grafting process, the grafting yield depends directly of the absorbed dose and on the monomer concentration as it was expected (Flores-Rojas and Bucio, 2016). The first results show that by using simultaneous polymerization at 10% v/v of concentration in toluene, lower GYs are produced (Fig. 1) than the ones obtained by previously reported pre-irradiation methods (Cabana et al., 2017). This is due to the high reactivity of AAc which favors the formation of the homopolymer. However, this behavior changes at higher concentrations at a fixed dose of 10 kGy where the GYs reach about 100%. This is due to the easy contact between a greater number of radicals formed in the polymer matrix and the monomer. At this point, the modified films present breakability and poor swelling properties which limits their applicability; therefore, lower grafting yields are desirable. The samples prepared with doses above 10 kGy presented the poor mechanical properties because of excessive grafting yields; therefore, the concentration was varied at a dose of 10 kGy. This effect also happened with concentrations above 10% v/v so the effect of the dose was evaluated at this concentration.
Fig. 1. Grafting yields of (Image 1) PDMS-g-AAc; (Image 2) PDMS-1 and (Image 3) PDMS-5. a) Fixed monomer concentration: 10% v/v and 1:1 AAc/EGDMA. b) Fixed dose: 10 kGy.
Different grafting yields were obtained when EGDMA is added to the system. In Fig. 1a, the continuous line represents the behavior of the system as a function of the dose. As observed, when the monomers’ molar ratio (AAc/EGDMA) is increased, the grafting yields are higher than the ones from the samples obtained using an equimolar ratio. This happened for all the ratios tested (PDMS-1 to PDMS-5).1 When the amount of cross-linking agent is decreased, the GYs increased considerably. This could be explained by the fact that when more EGDMA is available in the matrix, the probability of formation of PAAc homopolymer is lower because there is less chance that two molecules of AAc react with each other within the solution. In all cases, the use of toluene as solvent allows for the diffusion of monomers into the bulk of PDMS matrix which increases the interactions between the PDMS matrix and the monomers, allowing for high GYs.
To observe the effect of the variation of the monomer concentration, films grafted at equimolar conditions (AAc/EGDMA, 1:1) and films with only AAc were tested. In Fig. 1b the GYs as a function of monomers’ concentrations for PDMS-1 (continuous line) and PDMS-g-AAc (dashed line) are shown, as it is observed, GYs increase considerably above a concentration of 10% v/v for films grafted with only AAc; however, for equimolar AAc/EGDMA GYs did not exceed ~40%. This could be explained by the fact that more monomers interact with the bulk of PDMS by diffusion if the concentration of the monomers is increased. In this case, AAc reacts readily with PDMS radicals; however, when EGDMA is present, there is a greater probability of termination reactions which limit chain sizes and thus GYs.
3.2. Characterization of modified PDMS films
FTIR-ATR spectra (Fig. 2) confirmed that the grafting reaction was successful, since there exist clear differences between PDMS and PDMS-g-(AAc-co-EGDMA) films. The spectrum of pristine PDMS showed strong bands at ~1000 cm-1 and ~750 cm-1 corresponding to the Si–O–Si stretching and Si–CH3 bending vibrations, respectively (Fig. 2, PDMS). The short band in ~2900 cm-1 is attributed to the typical band for C–H stretching and it is present in all the spectra. After radiation polymerization, practically all the modified PDMS films present roughly the same spectrum [Fig. 2, PDMS-g-(AAc-co-EGDMA)] because even though the GY changes, the concentration of the functional groups on the PDMS matrix is low, so small changes in concentration of the functional groups do not greatly affect the spectrum. The graph shows an absorption band at ~1720 cm-1 which represents the stretching of the carbonyl group, this signal is also present in the copolymer [Fig. 2, P(AAc-co-EGDMA], confirming the presence of this group on the functionalized PDMS matrix.
Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (799KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. FTIR-ATR spectra of the different modified PDMS films.
Thermal behavior was different for all the samples; however, all the materials had good thermal stability. This makes sense since PDMS possesses intrinsic thermal stability (Fallahi et al., 2003; Kaneko et al., 2019). For instance, the temperature at which pure PDMS loses 10% weight is 501 °C, while its decomposition temperature is 588 °C. In addition, the degradation temperature of PAAc is reported to be above 150 °C with a decarboxylation occurring at 260–350 °C (Cabana et al., 2017). With this information, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed for the non-grafted copolymer formed in the PDMS-1 reaction media and to all the different modified PDMS films.
According to the results of TGA (Fig. 3a), all PDMS-g-(AAc-co-EGDMA) films with GY ~50% present better thermal stability than the copolymer but worse than pristine PDMS, the first weight lost is near 350 ± 10 °C and the total decomposition is at 420 ± 10 °C, only one loss of mass was observed. This indicates that the formation of a copolymer, suggesting that the grafting occurred not only on the surface of the material, but also on its bulk.2
Fig. 3. Thermal behavior analysis by a) TGA and b) DSC of (a) PDMS; (b) PDMS-1; (c) PDMS-5; (d) PDMS-g-AAc and (e) P(AAc-co-EGDMA).
DSC analysis (Fig. 3b) showed no additional results. Pristine PDMS did not show any thermal transitions; on the other hand, the modified PDMS presents the thermal transition corresponding to the decomposition temperature at 215 °C (PDMS-g-AAc), 255 °C (PDMS-2) and 266 °C (PDMS-1). The copolymer P(AAc-co-EGDMA) had a thermal transition at 50 °C attributed to the rearrangement of the polymer chains, this behavior does not appear in the modified PDMS.
3.3. Hydrophilicity studies: contact angle
Since the cross-linked hydrogels of PAAc have superabsorbent capacity, we evaluated the effect in the hydrophilicity of the modified surface. PDMS is extremely hydrophobic due to its dangling methyl groups which do not allow water into the matrix; nevertheless, when this polymer matrix is modified with hydrophilic functional groups, the surface may become able retain water or other polar solvents.
Using contact angle measurements, the surface wettability of the different films was studied. The introduction of EGDMA to the systems produces an increase in the cross-linking degree. By using contact angle, the effect of this cross-linking in the wettability of the surface of the films may be analyzed.
Samples with GY of ~50% of all different monomer ratios were compared, the angle was measured at 5 and 10 min, Fig. 4 shows the contact angle as a function of time, and a representation of the experiment at 5 min. Initially, the difference between the films is not noticeable; however, after 5 and then 10 min, the contact angle decreased significantly. The results depend directly on the crosslinking degree. For instance, when the monomer ratio (AAc/EGDMA) is decreased, the contact angle decreases, due to the higher concentration of acrylic acid and the reduced expected crosslinking degree.
Fig. 4. Contact angle for (Image 4) PDMS; (Image 5) PDMS-g-AAc, (Image 6) PDMS-1, (Image 7) PDMS-3 and (Image 8) PDMS-5.
3.4. Hydrophilicity studies: equilibrium water content
To analyze the equilibrium water content (EWC%) of the modified PDMS films, swelling studies were performed in different aqueous solutions (with varying the ionic strengths). In these studies, films with low and high GYs were evaluated. The swelling behavior varies importantly when ions are present in the water and it depends directly on the GY of the films. The difference between the assays in DI water and in the buffer solution are due to the increase in repulsion interactions between charged groups of the modified PDMS and the ions in the media.
PDMS-g-AAc behaved differently than the films modified with AAc and EGDMA. As seen on Fig. 5, PDMS-g-AAC had the same swelling behavior in both DI water and in a buffer solution. This may indicate that the presence of EGDMA on films PDMS-1 through 5 increases repulsion interactions which promote higher EWC%.
Fig. 5. Equilibrium water content for (Image 9) PDMS-g-AAc, (Image 10) PDMS-1, (Image 11) PDMS-3 and (Image 12) PDMS-5 in a) deionized water and b) phosphate buffer (ionic strength = 0.13 M).
As we can see in the Fig. 5, samples finished swelling sooner in DI water (24 h) than in the buffer solution (33 h). According to these results, the subsequent pH tests in buffer solutions were carried out taking 36 h as limit SD.
Confirming the results of thermal analysis and contact angle measurements, PDMS-5 swelled dramatically in comparison with the other films. Therefore, a considerable amount of AAc is present within PDMS matrix and not only at its surface.
3.5. pH sensitivity: swelling behavior
After verifying that the swelling behavior was different in buffer conditions than in DI water, swelling as a function of pH was evaluated. In the Fig. 6, it is shown that at pH= 8, the increase in SD directly correlated with the GY and the amount of the acrylic acid in the reaction media. PDMS-5 presented a greater water gain than the rest of films; nevertheless, the sizes of all the films increased considerably when GY was ~50%. Water absorption is significantly different for the samples with 30 and 50% of GY, PDMS-1 with lower GY shows a limit SD of 6% at pH =11 while the film with more graft had a SD of 18% due to absorbed water.
Fig. 6. Swelling behavior in buffer solution for (Image 13) PDMS-g-AAc, (Image 14) PDMS-1, (Image 15) PDMS-3 and (Image 16) PDMS-5 with a) GY ~50% and b) 30%.
It is important to mention that the dramatic swelling of the films for grafts in the order of 50% are not useful for medical applications. Grafts above 30% show the same response at pH=8 but they do not increase their size detrimentally.
PDMS-g-AAc showed low stability in water due to the solubility of PAAc in aqueous media, when pH increases, the films loses weight and become porous. This behavior is only present in the films with a GY above 50%. PDMS-g-AAc with lower GY presents the typical pH sensitivity for PAAc with a critical pH value of 8 in a similar fashion to PDMS modified with both AAc and EGDMA.
It is important to remark that the hydrolysis of acrylate esters occurs above pH 10. At this pH the films began to lose stability, since hydrolysis was promoted. The appearance of hydroxyl groups due to hydrolysis is identified using FTIR-ATR, see supporting information Fig. S3.
3.6. pH sensitivity: potentiometric titrations
Potentiometric titrations were performed to evaluate the behavior of the acid-base pair acrylic acid/potassium acrylate (HAAc/AAc-) that is present in the grafted chains of the PAAc. For films with a GY ~50%, as seen in Fig. 7, for PDMS-1, PDMS-2, and PDMS-3 (AAc:EGDMA 1:1, 2:1, 3:1 respectively), the volume needed to reach the equivalent point increases with increasing amount of AAc in the original mixture, which indicates that there is a greater amount of acid groups on the modified material, this makes sense since GYs are higher when the amount of AAc increases with respect to EGDMA in the reaction conditions. In contrast, for PDMS-4 and PDMS-5, the amount of acid groups is apparently lower, and this is attributed to the fact that a greater amount of AAc in the media when the reaction was performed favors homopolymerization of itself to form PAAc, thus a greater amount of the grafted groups are composed of EGDMA which has no acid-base properties.
Fig. 7. Potentiometric titrations for of (a) PDMS-1; (b) PDMS-2; (c) PDMS-3; (d) PDMS-4 and (d) PDMS-5.
4. Conclusion
The functionalization of PDMS with the copolymer EGDMA and AAc using toluene as a solvent was successfully performed by using the simultaneous radiation method. The obtained materials showed varying characteristics depending on the molar ratio between AAc and the crosslinking agent EGDMA. It was found that the inclusion of EGDMA in the surface and bulk of the PDMS matrix provides stability to the system in aqueous conditions, while the interaction with the dissolved ions allowed for high water retentions reaching swelling ratios above 100%. In contrast, when the films were only grafted with AAc, water stability was compromised, this was verified by the weight loss suffered in aqueous conditions. Additionally, PDMS-g-AAc did not change its behavior when interacting with ions, suggesting that the EGDMA/AAc graft generates greater repulsion in the swollen polymer matrix than pure AAc.
Acid-base titrations and contact angle measurements confirmed that the diffusion of AAc into the polymers’ matrix is favored by the solvent, and the grafts of acidic groups are mainly in the bulk of the PDMS rather than on the surface. Finally, it is important to remark that the materials retain the convenient thermal stability of pure PDMS.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
M.A. Velazco-Medel: Writing - original draft, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization. L.A. Camacho-Cruz: Writing - review & editing, Visualization. E. Bucio: Conceptualization, Supervision, Investigation, Resources, Visualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
The authors thank to CONACYT-Mexico (CVU 696062) for supported M. A Velazco-Medel and Dirección General de Asuntos del Personal Académico, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México under Grant IN202320, and to MSc Benjamín Leal from ICN-UNAM for technical assistance.
