<title>Void reactivity aspect and fuel conversion potential of heavy water cooled thorium reactor</title>
<author>Sidik Permana; Abdul Waris; Zaki Suud; Hiroshi Sekimoto</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Physics and Bio Physics Research Division, Department of Physics, Bandung Institute of Technology, Gedung Fisika, Jl. Ganesha 10, Bandung, 40132 Indonesia;Tokyo City University, 1-28-1 Tamazutsumi, Setagaya, Tokyo, 158-8557 Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.3594</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/er.3594</URL>
Summary
Design study on heavy water cooled thorium breeding reactor has been investigated by adopting a nuclear equilibrium state model. Conversion ratio, as an important index, has been evaluated to estimate the breeding capability of the reactors. Void reactivity coefficient has also been investigated to evaluate performance index of safety aspect, which is based on the criticality performance of the reactors during voided condition. In addition, moderator-to-fuel ratio has also been employed to analyze its effect to the required enrichment, conversion ratio, and void reactivity coefficient as well as different burnups and fuel pin diameter effects. Void reactivity coefficient indicates a criticality condition of the reactor when some coolants are lost. If the negative value of void reactivity is achieved, it means that the reactor has less reactivity condition as well as less power production when lost of coolant occurred. Higher fuel conversion capability, that more nuclear fuel are produced, those additional fuel productions can be used for next operation or for other reactors. The results show that higher fuel conversion ratio can be achieved for less moderator-to-fuel ratio because of the harder neutron spectrum effect, while it requires more fissile content of 233U to maintain the reactor operation from fission reaction. Higher burnup gives less conversion ratio because some fissile materials are used to maintain longer reactor operation, and at the same time, it requires more initial required fissile 233U for higher burnup. In addition, it requires less fissile 233U for thicker fuel pin diameter, while its conversion ratio becomes higher, and void reactivity coefficient is more negative for thicker fuel pin diameter. The results also show that thorium utilization on heavy water cooled reactor gives all negative void reactivity values, which means that the system has a safety condition in terms of void reactivity condition. At the same time, it shows some feasible conditions for obtaining fuel breeding to increase the sustainability of nuclear fuel. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1 Introduction
A self-sustaining system is an essential concept in the improvement of the nuclear reactor capability and the life expectancy of the nuclear fuel resources. Water cooled reactor, as one of the proven technologies, which is mainly light water and heavy water reactor, produces the energy by consuming uranium fuel with lower conversion ratio capability as well as high-temperature reactor type 1, 2. Some researchers have investigated some new designs or specific modifications of present technology to increase the conversion capability, although it has some obstacles because of safety concern, especially on positive void reactivity performance 3, 4. As well-proven technology, water cooled reactors are still the good candidate for obtaining high conversion ratio or breeding performance, which utilizes the thermal spectrum capability, and it shows some advantages by reducing moderator-to-fuel ratio (MFR) to improve the breeding condition 2, 5-8. Thorium fuel with fissile 233U shows the superior ƞ (eta) value in thermal and epithermal regions than other fissile nuclides. ƞ indicates a ratio of neutron production to neutron absorption of the fuel in the reactor, which can be used to estimate the fission capability as well as fuel breeding capability of nuclear fuel. At the same time, it gives a negative void reactivity coefficient and provides some other advantages such as high burnup and more proliferation resistance 9-14 compared with fissile plutonium as a basis of uranium–plutonium cycle case. More proliferation resistance and more breeding capability of thorium fuel can be compared with the reactor, which shows plutonium isotopes in plutonium cycle scheme and gives some advantages for fuel breeding capability as well as some plutonium compositions, which obtain more proliferation resistance 15-19. The objective of the study is to analyze the design optimization of heavy water cooled breeding reactors using 233U–Th as fuel based on the safety aspect of void reactivity and fuel conversion condition of the reactor by adopting a nuclear equilibrium state model 6, 20, 21.
2 Calculation Method
In the present study, an equilibrium state burnup calculation has been used, which consists of the equilibrium burnup calculation model and the cell calculation of SRAC code module 2, 6, 20-23. These coupling calculation codes are called equilibrium cell iterative calculation system 20, 21, and they use JENDL 3.2 as nuclear data library 24. To analyze the nuclear reactor operation, reactor criticality of the system will be evaluated, which is based on the nuclear multiplication factor of neutron population in the reactor, which is called the criticality factor of infinite multiplication factor and effective multiplication factor. Infinite multiplication factor or kinf is defined as a neglected neutron leakage factor in the reactor. The actual calculation for kinf was performed by SRAC 22. The second multiplication factor is effective multiplication factor or keff, which shows that the effect of leakage from geometry size is included for evaluation. To analyze the effect of void condition for void reactivity coefficient, the void conditions of the reactor are set in a condition of 50% void fraction. The conservative estimation has been used for void evaluation, when the reactivity is based on the infinite neutron multiplication factor (k-infinity), because the neutron leakage effect is ignored. Fuel conversion ratios of the reactor are estimated from the equilibrium atom composition, which is based on the fertile and fissile nuclides, and some contributions from intermediate nuclides such as 234U and 233Pa. The conversion process is evaluated by considering the conversion capability of fertile material into fissile material, which gives the estimation of fuel conversion ratio process in the reactor. Capturing rates of 232Th and 234U are predicted to produce some fissile materials such as 233U and 235U, respectively. Absorption rates of the fissile material of 233U and 235U are estimated for the conversion process of fissile material for fission. Contribution of the capture cross-sectional rate of 233Pa is also estimated to have a contribution as an intermediate nuclide, which converts to 233U as additional contribution.
3 Basic Parameter of Reactor for Cell Calculation
The reactor analysis based on the heavy water cooled thorium reactor has been investigated, and the basic reactor parameters of the investigated systems are tabulated in Table I. The average power density in the fuel pellet is fixed for several investigation parameters (140 W/cc). The power density of 140 W/cc is employed, which is considered twice lower than the power density of PWR standard. The 280 W/cc is the power density in fuel pellet that is estimated to be equal to 100 W/cc in the average core power density of PWR type 1, 16. Various targeted discharged fuel burnups (6 to 50 GWd/t) have been evaluated.
Table I. Basic design parameters.
Parameters
Thermal power output [MWt]	3000
Fuel pellet average power density [W/cc]	140
Fuel pin diameter (inner) [mm]	14.5 and 9.6
Discharge fuel burnup [GWd/t]	6–50
Moderator-to-fuel ratio, (MFR) [—]	1 and 2
Void fraction case	50%
Height of core [cm]	370
Composition	Material
Supply fuel	232Th–233U oxide
Cladding	Zircaloy-4
Coolant	Heavy water
The investigated MFR of the reactor is used to obtain two different MFR values, MFR = 1 and MFR = 2, for comparative analysis purposes. Different MFR values are employed to evaluate the effect of moderator-to-fuel volume ratio, which is effective to shift the neutron spectrum when it becomes harder to less MFR. Employed MFR values of MFR ≤1.0 are classified as a tight lattice fuel pin of the reactor, and for this evaluation, MFR = 1 was chosen for a tight lattice fuel pin in comparing with the PWR MFR standard, that is, MFR = 2. The different fuel pin diameters are evaluated in order to analyze the thickness effect of the fuel for required fissile needed and breeding capability as well as the void reactivity coefficient. Those are pin diameter fuels of 9.6 and 14.5 mm, which are based on the fuel pin diameter of the PWR standard and shipping port fuel pin designs 10. Some analyses have been performed also for different fuel burnup values from 6 to 50 GWd/t. This burnup values are adopted, considering typical fuel burnup values of PWR, that is, 33 GWd/t, and a fuel burnup of typical conventional CANDU-type reactor, that is, 7.5 GWd/t, as comparable references. This reactor design system is based on a typical PWR type, which used 233U–Th oxide as fuel type and heavy water cooled as coolant type.
4 Results and Discussion
To evaluate the breeding performance, conversion ratio is investigated as an index to estimate the breeding capability during reactor operation. The void reactivity coefficient is introduced to evaluate the performance index of safety performance that is based on the criticality performance during voided condition to the normal condition. The effect of MFR has been employed to analyze its effect to the required enrichment, conversion ratio, and void reactivity coefficient as well as different burnups and fuel pin diameter effects.
4.1 Effect of moderator-to-fuel ratio to required 233U and breeding ratio
Less MFR is estimated to make neutron spectrum become harder. MFR effect is also effective to make better breeding capability, although it requires more fissile materials or enrichment because of the contribution of hardening spectrum in the reactor 2, 6. In this evaluation, working moderator and coolant materials are heavy water. It was estimated that the reactor condition which is cooled by heavy water coolant requires higher fissile enrichment than light water coolant reactor to maintain its criticality because of the harder neutron spectrum 2. The obtained results of the MFR effect are shown in Figure 1. It shows the required fissile content of 233U and the conversion ratio for different MFRs: MFR = 1 and MFR = 2. Less MFR requires more fissile content to maintain the reactor operation because the neutron spectrum becomes harder. In addition, the harder spectrum of less MFR obtains more conversion ratio than the softer spectrum of MFR = 2. The conversion ratio of the less MFR of MFR = 1 is effective to reach a breeding condition compared with MFR = 2, which obtains near-breeding condition or high-conversion ratio condition. It is estimated that less MFR regions can achieve conversion ratio more than unity, that is, breeding, and it can be more breeding for less MFR, as shown in Figure 1. However, because less MFR gives harder spectrum, the fissile materials are required to make more fission for maintaining reactor operation.
Figure 1
Required 233U and conversion ratio for different moderator-to-fuel ratios.
4.2 Effect of burnup level to required U-233 and breeding ratio
Different burnup levels are used for comparable analysis to estimate its effect to required U-233 and conversion ratio. The burnup levels varied from 6 to 50 GWd/t based on discharged fuel burnup constant. The obtained results of the burnup effect to the required 233U and breeding ratio are shown in Figures 2 and 3. It shows the profile of the required 233U and conversion ratio for different burnup levels. Figure 2 shows that the required 233U are increasing, with increasing burnup level for both MFR values. Higher burnup level gives more production of fission products, that is, corresponding to maintain longer reactor operation that makes neutron spectrum harder. When neutron spectrum becomes harder, fission reaction becomes less, and to maintain criticality condition, it requires more fissile materials. Figure 3 shows the profile of conversion ratio for different burnup levels for both MFR values. It shows that higher burnup levels obtain less conversion ratio for both MFR values. As mentioned, higher burnup level makes the neutron spectrum harder, which is corresponding to increase the required fissile content of 233U. Higher burnup requires more fissile content to maintain its operation that affects the occurrence of more fission from fissile material. Its condition makes a decreasing fissile material production for longer operation or higher burnup. This is the reason why higher burnup obtains less conversion ratio than lower burnup that shows a decreasing production rate of fissile material compared with an increasing rate of fissile material consumption because of fission condition. MFR equal to 2 obtains breeding condition, which means that conversion ratio is greater than unity (CR ≥ 1) for burnup less than 36 GWd/t, while MFR = 1, in which less moderation ratio achieves breeding condition for all burnup levels from 6 up to 50 GWd/t. Breeding condition can be achieved effectively for higher burnup when MFR becomes less, such as changing the MFR value from MFR = 2 to MFR = 1.
Figure 2
Required 233U for different burnup levels.
Figure 3
Conversion ratio for different burnup levels.
4.3 Void reactivity coefficient for different burnup levels and MFR
The evaluation for different burnup levels and MFR is used also for comparable analysis to estimate its effect to void reactivity coefficient that can be used to estimate the reactivity condition of the reactor criticality based on the condition of void condition of coolant as one of the safety aspects of the reactor. The obtained results of void reactivity coefficient for different burnup levels and MFR are shown in Figure 4. Changing the MFR gives a significant change in void reactivity coefficient as well as a changing the value of burnup. Although all of the obtained results of void reactivity coefficient are corresponding to some negative values, the safety aspect of the reactor regarding this void condition aspect is safe. For comparative evaluation, we will show and discuss the effect of MFR and burnup to void reactivity coefficient. It is shown that void reactivity coefficient becomes less negative for less moderation ratio than MFR = 1, and it obtains less negative void than MFR = 2. In terms of burnup levels, void reactivity also obtains less negative for higher burnup values. Less MFR and higher burnup level correspond to a hardening spectrum of the reactor, which makes the production rate of fission reactor less than the absorption rate of fuel materials when the void condition occurs compared with normal condition. Regarding the void reactivity profile in Figure 4, it can be seen that a significant number of reducing value of void reactivity is obtained by reducing MFR instead of increasing burnup level. This phenomenon gives the information that the significant method to change the condition of void reactivity coefficient is by employing the MFR change differently than burnup.
Figure 4
Void reactivity coefficient for different burnup.
4.4 Effect of fuel pin diameter
The evaluation for different fuel pin diameters and MFR to the required 233U, conversion ratio, and void reactivity coefficient will be shown and discussed in this section. The obtained results of fuel pin diameter effects are shown in Figures 5 to 7-5 to 7. A pin diameter of 9.6 mm is corresponding to a standard fuel pin of PWR type, while a pin diameter of 14.5 mm is based on the blanket region fuel type of shipping port reactor. Both fuel pin types are used to estimate the effect of fuel pin diameter thickness to the change in some reactor parameters such as criticality, required 233U, and conversion ratio and void reactivity. Figure 5 shows that the required 233U becomes less for thicker fuel pin diameter for both MFR values. While the conversion ratio obtained is higher, the void reactivity coefficient achieved more negative value for thicker fuel pin diameter, as shown in Figures 6 and 7, respectively. Less required 233U for thicker fuel pin diameter is estimated to have more amount of fuel (fissile content in mass for the same fissile content) for thicker fuel pin diameter. To maintain the same level of criticality condition, thicker fuel pin diameter becomes easier because of more amount of fuel to make a same fission reaction that requires less fissile content of 233U. It is also corresponding to the condition that thicker size of fuel diameter, which causes the fission reaction, becomes more. As mentioned in the previous section, the MFR effect to the change in the required 233U, which is a similar condition for both fuel pin diameter, is that higher MFR obtains less required 233U, as shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5
Required 233U for different fuel diameter levels and moderator-to-fuel ratios.
Figure 6
Conversion ratio for different fuel diameters.
Figure 7
Void reactivity coefficient for different fuel diameters.
More conversion ratio values are obtained by thicker fuel pin diameter. It is estimated from the more production of fissile material production from more fuel amount in thicker fuel size. Less required fissile material of 233U is also corresponding to increase the fissile material form conversion process of fertile material in the fuel pin for the same level of criticality, as shown in Figures 5 and 6. This condition shows that thicker fuel pin diameter or thicker size of fuel obtains more conversion ratio of fertile materials to fissile materials than thinner fuel pin size. Void reactivity coefficient obtains more negative value for thicker fuel pin diameter, which can be estimated that ticker fuel makes the fission reaction occur easier, which corresponds to making the production rate of fission reactor become more than absorption rate of fuel materials when the void condition occurs in comparing with normal condition. As mentioned, different MFR values show a significant change in void reactivity, which is also shown for different fuel pin diameters. Both fuel pin diameters show a significant change in void reactivity, so more MFR gives more void reactivity coefficient, as shown in Figure 7.
5 Conclusions
Analysis on safety aspect of void reactivity and fuel conversion condition of the reactor by adopting a nuclear equilibrium state model has been investigated based on heavy water cooled reactor using 233U–Th as fuel. Those important aspects of evaluations are conversion ratio as an index to estimate the breeding capability and void reactivity coefficient to evaluate the performance index of safety, which is based on the criticality performance during voided condition. In addition, the MFR has been employed to analyze its effect on the required fissile content of 233U, conversion ratio, and void reactivity coefficient as well as different burnups and fuel pin diameters effects.
The obtained results show that less MFR requires more fissile content of 233U to maintain the reactor operation, and it obtains more conversion ratio because of the harder neutron spectrum effect. In addition, the higher required 233U and less conversion ratio are achieved for higher burnup value to maintain a longer reactor operation. In terms of different fuel pin diameters, it shows that the required 233U becomes less for thicker fuel pin diameter, while the conversion ratio is obtained higher, and the void reactivity coefficient achieved more negative value for thicker fuel pin diameter. Based on the analyses, thorium utilization on heavy water cooled system shows that all obtained void reactivities are negative, which means that the reactor gives safety condition in terms of void reactivity condition, and it shows some feasible conditions for obtaining breeding condition, which makes the feasible design increase the sustainability of nuclear fuel.
Acknowledgements
We would like acknowledge and extend our gratitude to ITB research innovation program and desentralisasi research program of ministry of research, technology, and higher education for the international conference grant and publications
References
