<title>Interdiffusion and reaction between U and Zr</title>
<author>Y. Park; R. Newell; A. Mehta; D.D. Keiser; Y.H. Sohn</author>
<Affiliation>Advanced Materials Processing and Analysis Center, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA;Idaho National Laboratory, PO Box 1625, Idaho Falls, ID 83401, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.jnucmat.2018.01.063</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311517314824</URL>
Abstract
The microstructural development and diffusion kinetics were examined for the binary U vs. Zr system using solid-to-solid diffusion couples, U vs. Zr, annealed at 580 °C for 960 h, 650 °C for 480 h, 680 °C for 240 h, and 710 °C for 96 h. Scanning and transmission electron microscopies with X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy were employed for detailed microstructural and compositional analyses. Interdiffusion and reaction in U vs. Zr diffusion couples primarily produced: δ-UZr2 solid solution (hP3) and α′-U at 580 °C; and (γU,βZr) solid solution (cI2) and α′-U at 650°, 680° and 710 °C. The α′-phase was confirmed as a reduced variant of the α-U orthorhombic structure with lattice parameters, a × b × c = 2.65 × 5.40 × 4.75 (Å) with a negligible solubility for Zr at room temperature. Concentration profiles were examined to determine interdiffusion coefficients, integrated interdiffusion coefficients, and intrinsic diffusion coefficients using Boltzmann-Matano, Wagner, and Heumann analyses, respectively. Composition-dependence of interdiffusion coefficients were documented for α-U, δ-UZr2 (at 580 °C) and (γU,βZr) solid solution (at 650°, 680° and 710 °C). U was determined to intrinsically diffuse faster than Zr, approximately by an order of magnitude, in the δ-UZr2 at 580 °C, and (γU,βZr) phases at 650°, 680° and 710 °C. Based on Darken's approach, thermodynamic data available in literature were coupled to estimate the tracer diffusion coefficients and atomic mobilities of U and Zr.
1. Introduction
U-based metallic fuels are being developed for a variety of nuclear reactors, capitalizing on their high burnup ability, high thermal conductivity, compatibility for fabrication, and ability to be recycled [[1], [2], [3]]. Of the U allotropes, the high temperature bcc γ-phase exhibits the best structural stability [[4], [5], [6]]. However, elemental U immediately transforms to the orthorhombic α-phase upon cooling, and the α-phase is characterized by poor corrosion resistance and anisotropic irradiation behavior. Consequently, alloys of γ-U are investigated as candidate fuels. With high solubility in γ-U, Mo has been shown to promote its retention at room temperature without sacrificing substantial U density [[7], [8], [9]]. As a result, U-Mo alloys have been extensively investigated for direct conversion from the use of highly enriched U to low enriched U in high performance research and test reactors.
While U-Mo alloys exhibit good irradiation behavior, they have been shown to rapidly interact with the Al alloy matrix or cladding, resulting in the formation of brittle intermetallic compounds. As a result, a Zr diffusion barrier was proposed to mitigate the interaction between U-Mo fuel alloy and Al alloy cladding in monolithic fuels [[10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]]. Zr was selected due to its low neutron absorption, high melting point, good corrosion resistance, and compatibility with the existing fabrication process [15,16].
Interdiffusion and reaction between U and Zr plays an important role for development of metallic nuclear fuels. For research and test reactors applications, interdiffusion and reaction occur between the Zr diffusion barrier and the U-Mo fuel during fabrication and irradiation. This reaction can result in the formation of δ-UZr2 as well as concentration variations in the U alloy near the diffusion barrier. The γ-U also exhibits high Zr solubility at elevated temperature. For the fast reactor applications [2], Zr redistribution in U-Zr-actinide fuel alloys warrants a better understanding of interdiffusion between U and Zr [[17], [18], [19], [20], [21]].
Previously, Ogata et al. [17] reported the interdiffusion coefficients for (γU, βZr) solid solution from 700° to 950 °C with Zr concentrations ranging from 10 to 95 at.%. The interdiffusion coefficients in the Zr concentration range from 20 to 40 at.% were lower than those reported by Adda et al. [22] due to a reduction in the thermodynamic factor. Akabori et al. [23] also reported the interdiffusion behavior in the δ-UZr2 and (γU,βZr) phases in temperature ranges of 550°–580 °C and 650° to 700 °C, respectively.
2. Analytical framework
In this study, analyses of concentration profiles for the determination of diffusion coefficients were carried out by methods of Boltzmann-Matano [24,25], Sauer-Freise [26], and Wagner [27]. Assuming a constant molar volume, the interdiffusion flux of a component i, Ji, can be calculated [28] from an interdiffusion concentration profile using the location of the Matano plane, xo:
@(1)
where Ci and Ci are the concentrations at the terminal ends, Ci is the concentration of component i, and xo is the location of Matano plane. The interdiffusion coefficient,Di , can be expressed by substituting Equation (1) into Fick's first law, which yields:
@(2)
Boltzmann-Matano analysis is typically valid only for systems with negligible change in molar volume. The Sauer-Freise method [26], on the other hand, provides a generalized modification to Boltzmann-Matano analysis for systems with variable molar volume. In Sauer-Freise method, the interdiffusion flux of a component can be determined by:
@(3)
where
@(4)
The interdiffusion coefficient then can be expressed as:
@(5)
In addition, Boltzmann-Matano approach also relies on a non-zero concentration gradient term. Wagner's analysis [27] coupled with Sauer-Freise approach can be utilized to determine the integrated interdiffusion coefficient for an intermetallic phase with a thickness of Δxi and negligible concentration gradient using the relation:
@(6)
The integrated interdiffusion coefficients are typically calculated for a phase with negligible solubility [28], leading to negligible concentration gradient. In this case, the integrated interdiffusion coefficients can follow an Arrhenius temperature-dependence, assuming that the interdiffusion coefficients do not vary with composition, i.e., within the small concentration range, and follow an Arrhenius temperature-depende.
Differences in intrinsic flux of individual components in a binary system can lead to movement of Kirkendall marker plane (xm), e.g., if the intrinsic flux of element U is larger than that of element Zr, xm moves to the U-rich side relative to the Matano plane xo. The accumulated intrinsic flux of a component i, Ai at the marker location, xm, is expressed by:
@(7)
and the intrinsic diffusion coefficient, Di, at the marker composition can be determined using the expression [29]:
@(8)
A simple relationship between interdiffusion and intrinsic diffusion coefficients is given by the Darken equation [30] assuming constant temperature, pressure and molar volume, and negligible vacancy wind effect:
@(9)
where the activity of component i, ai, defines the thermodynamic factor,Φ=-∂ln(ai)/∂ln(Ci) , and Di is the tracer diffusion coefficient. The intrinsic diffusion coefficient can be related to tracer and atomic mobility, βi as:
@(10)
3. Experimental details
Depleted U and reactor-grade high-purity Zr (99.9%) were employed for the experiments in this study. All metallographic preparation and diffusion couple assembly was performed in a glove box under Ar atmosphere to minimize oxidation. Both U and Zr were prepared into disk shape, approximate 5 mm in diameter and 3 mm in thickness. The surface of the U and Zr disks were ground using silicon carbide polishing pads (240, 600, 800 and 1200 grit) with ethanol as a lubricant. The disks were then immediately clamped together using stainless steel jigs. Alumina spacers were placed between the metals and jig to prevent interaction. The couples were encapsulated in quartz tubes, and the capsule was repeatedly evacuated to 10−6 torr followed by flushing with Ar and H2 gas. The tubes were finally evacuated to roughly 10−6 torr and sealed. The sealed couples were annealed in a Lindberg/Blue™ three-zone tube furnace at 580 °C for 960 h, 650 °C for 480 h, 680 °C for 240 h, and 710 °C for 96 h.
The U-Zr binary phase diagram is presented in Fig. 1 with the annealing temperatures indicated by dotted lines. After the diffusion anneal, the couples were removed from the furnace, and immediately quenched by breaking the quartz capsule in cold water in an attempt to preserve high temperature microstructure. The couples were submerged for several minutes in water then mounted in epoxy and cross-sectioned. The cross-sections were metallographically prepared using 1 μm diamond paste as the final step to ensure an even surface for microstructural and compositional analyses.
Fig. 1. U-Zr equilibrium phase diagram. The dotted lines indicate the temperatures selected for annealing U-Zr diffusion couples [4].
A field-emission scanning electron microscope (Zeiss™ ULTRA-55 FESEM) was used with an accelerating voltage of 30 KeV to examine the cross-section of diffusion couples. Backscatter and secondary electron (BSE and SE) micrographs were collected to observe microstructure. X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (XEDS) equipped on FESEM with appropriate corrections was utilized for semi-quantitative compositional analysis by collecting point-to-point line scans that produced concentration profiles representative of the interdiffusion zones. Samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were prepared via focused ion beam (FEI™ TEM200 FIB) in-situ lift-out (INLO) technique. A TEM (FEI/Tecnai™ F30) operating at 300 KeV equipped with high angle annular dark field (HAADF) and XEDS detectors was used to examine selected phases within the interdiffusion zones. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns were collected and analyzed for crystal structure identification in combination with bright-field (BF), dark-field (DF), and high angle annular dark field (HAADF) micrographs.
4. Phase constituents and microstructure
Fig. 2 shows BSE micrographs from water-quenched diffusion couples annealed at (a) 580 °C for 960 h, (b) 650 °C for 480 h, (c) 680 °C for 240 h, and (d) 710 °C for 96 h. Based on BSE micrographs and XEDS analyses, constituent phases were identified as labeled in Fig. 2, and include (γU,βZr) solid solution (cI2), δ-UZr2 solid solution (hP3), α-Zr (hP2) precipitates (confirmed by TEM), and α′-U (confirmed by TEM). The marker plane, xm, shift was observed towards the U-rich side from the Matano interface, xo, for all U-Zr diffusion couples. They were located within the (a) δ-UZr2 and (b, c, d) (γU,βZr) solid solution as presented in Fig. 2. Therefore, the intrinsic diffusion of U atoms into the Zr-rich side is considered faster than the intrinsic diffusion of Zr atoms into the U-rich side.
Fig. 2. Backscatter electron micrographs from water-quenched U vs. Zr diffusion couples annealed at (a) 580 °C for 96 h, (b) 650 °C for 480 h, (c) 680 °C for 240 h, and (d) 710 °C for 96 h. The dotted rectangle in (c) represents the area selected for TEM investigation.
The acicular Zr precipitates within the α-U were assumed to be formed during cooling due to reduced solubility of Zr in α-U (oC4) at room temperature; the Zr solute were rejected from supersaturated α-U and β-U (tP30) upon cooling. These acicular precipitates were not δ-UZr2, and confirmed to be relatively pure Zr (hP2) using analytical TEM. High purity β-U and γ-U have been shown to transform to orthorhombic α-U despite water-cooling to room temperature [31]. Cooling U from 840 °C to room temperature led to transformations of γ into β, and β into α in roughly 0.2 and 0.4 s, respectively [31]. Faster allotropic transformations from higher purity β-U and γ-U have been also reported by Peterson et al. [32]. Presence of acicular Zr precipitates instead of δ-UZr2 warrants a study that examines the variation of Zr solubility in U allotropes and, concurrently the nucleation kinetics of δ-UZr2.
Despite considerable research on the U-Zr system, the α′-phase has not been examined in detail. To that end, a TEM sample was extracted by FIB-INLO from the dotted-rectangle region shown in Fig. 2(c). A HAADF scanning TEM (STEM) micrograph from the sample is presented in Fig. 3. Within the α-U region, relatively large and mostly acicular, as seen in Fig. 2, α-Zr precipitates were observed, while smaller and fewer δ-UZr2 precipitates were dispersed throughout the (γU,βZr) region of the sample. In the α′ layer, however, both α-Zr and δ-UZr2 precipitates were observed. SAED patterns confirmed the crystal structures of (γU,βZr) solid solution (cI2) and α-U (oC4) as shown in Fig. 4(a) and 4(b), respectively. High resolution TEM (HRTEM) with fast Fourier transformation (FFT) analysis was carried out to identify the acicular Zr precipitates observed, as shown in Fig. 5(a) and 5(b). Similarly, for δ-UZr2 (hP3), BF TEM micrograph and HRTEM-FFT analysis are presented in Fig. 5(c) and (d).
Fig. 3. High angle annular dark field micrograph from the selected area in Fig. 2(c), representing the water-quenched U vs. Zr diffusion couple annealed at 650 °C for 480 h.
Fig. 4. Selected area diffraction patterns obtained from TEM sample shown in Fig. 3 for (a) (γU,βZr) solid solution and (b) α-U.
Fig. 5. (a) Bright-field TEM micrograph from the α-Zr (hP2) precipitates identified using (b) HR-TEM with FFT analysis (inset). (c) Bright-field TEM micrograph from the δ-UZr2 (hP3) identified using (d) HR-TEM with FFT analysis (inset).
The crystallographic information of α′-phase has never been reported to author's knowledge. In a previous study by Akabori et al. [23], U-rich phase less than 1 μm in thickness (or size) were observed near the initial interface of U68Zr vs. U75Zr diffusion couple annealed at 520 °C for 2400 h. Although this could potentially be the α′ phase, detailed identification was not conducted by Akabori et al. [23] due to the limited resolution of SEM. Therefore, the α′-phase was investigated via TEM as shown in Fig. 6. The BF TEM micrograph in Fig. 6(a) shows δ-UZr2, α-U, and α′-phase with the needle-like Zr precipitates. The dotted-circle in Fig. 6(a) indicates the selected area studied for the α′-phase by SAED analysis shown in Fig. 6(b) and HRTEM-FFT analysis shown in Fig. 6(c). Additional examination by FFT analysis of HRTEM and pixel intensity analysis, shown in Fig. 6(d), determined that the α′-phase was a reduced variant of the α-U orthorhombic structure with lattice parameters, a × b × c = 2.65 × 5.40 × 4.75 (Å). The α′-phase layer exhibited no compositional variation according to TEM XEDS analysis. The crystallographic information of the phases identified in study is summarized in Table 1.
Fig. 6. (a) Bright-field TEM micrograph from water quenched U vs. Zr diffusion couple annealed at 580 °C for 960 h shown Fig. 3(d). The dotted circle indicates the area selected for (b) SAED and (c) HR-TEM with FFT analysis. Pixel intensities, along lines ① and ② in (c) are shown in (d) and (e), were used to calculate the a and b lattice parameters of α′-phase, respectively.
Table 1. Crystallographic information for the phases identified in this study.
5. Interdiffusion
Concentration profiles and the corresponding interdiffusion flux profiles for the U-Zr diffusion couples annealed at (a, b) 580 °C for 960 h, (c, d) 650 °C for 480 h, (e, f) 680 °C for 240 h, and (g, h) 710 °C for 96 h are shown in Fig. 7. The interdiffusion coefficients were calculated using Eq. (2) for α-U (containing minor amounts of Zr precipitates), (γU,βZr) solid solution (above 615 °C), and δ-UZr2 (below 615 °C). Fig. 8 presents the interdiffusion coefficients determined as a function of Zr concentration at each temperature.
Fig. 7. Concentration profiles and the corresponding interdiffusion fluxes of U and Zr determined from U vs. Zr diffusion couples annealed at (a,b) 580 °C for 960 h, (c,d) 650 °C for 480 h, (e,f) 680 °C for 240 h, and (g,h) 710 °C for 96 h.
Fig. 8. Interdiffusion coefficients as a function of composition (at.% Zr), determined using Boltzmann-Matano analysis using Eq. (2).
Based on Gibbs' phase rule, no two-phase region should exist in a binary diffusion couple under constant temperature and pressure. However, a region of α-U containing minor amount of Zr precipitates was observed. This is likely due to the higher Zr solubility at elevated temperatures. When the diffusion couple was quenched, the Zr solute should precipitate out as a result of the lowered solubility at room temperature. It is thus assumed that the average composition at a plane containing α-U and Zr precipitates represents the composition of the α-U solid solution at high temperature. Semi-quantitative analysis was carried out using these averages to create representative composition profiles. Additionally, the variation of interdiffusion coefficient for each phase as a function of the total molar volume was ignored because the molar volume for each phase does not vary significantly, as seen in the values reported in Table 1.
Fig. 9 shows the interdiffusion coefficients determined at 71 at.% Zr as a function of temperature according to Akabori et al. [23], Ogata et al. [17], and this study. Overall, the interdiffusion coefficients of this study are higher than those reported by Akabori et al. [23], Ogata et al. [17], especially for the δ-UZr2 at 580 °C. Oxidation and impurity content of the alloys can influence the experimental measurement of interdiffusion coefficients. Given similar impurity content, oxidation of alloys during diffusion couple assembly, which results in the formation of thin oxide layer, would suppress the interdiffusion process.
Fig. 9. Interdiffusion coefficients determined at approximately 70 at.% Zr as a function of temperature along with values reported by Akabori et al. [23] and Ogata et al. [17].
The Sauer-Freise approach with Wagner's analysis was utilized to calculate the integrated interdiffusion coefficients for the α and α′-phases within the reaction layers using Eq. (6). The α- and α′-phase layers have small concentration range (i.e., solubility) that does not vary significantly with temperature. The activation energies and pre-exponential factors for the α- and α′-phases were estimated using the samples annealed at or above 650 °C only. The integrated interdiffusion coefficients determined for the α-U and α′-layer as a function of temperature are presented in Fig. 10. The integrated interdiffusion coefficients are expected to follow an Arrhenius relationship [28] given a similar solubility or composition range for a phase within the temperature range studied, so the slope of each line was used to estimate the activation energy of interdiffusion as reported in Table 2.
Fig. 10. Integrated interdiffusion coefficients as a function of temperature, determined using Sauer-Freise with Wagner analysis using Eq. (6) for α- and α′-phases.
Table 2. Estimated integrated interdiffusion coefficient (D), pre-exponential factor (D), and the corresponding activation energy (D) for the α-U and α′-phases.
6. Intrinsic diffusion and atomic mobility
Marker planes due to slight oxidation of metals were found within the diffusion couples in the δ-UZr2 phase at 580 °C and in the (γU,βZr) solid solution at 650°, 680° and 710 °C. The presence of the marker plane allowed determination of intrinsic diffusion coefficients at the corresponding composition using Eq. (8). The intrinsic diffusion coefficients for U and Zr at the marker composition are reported in Table 3 and plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. 11. Table 3 also reports the interdiffusion coefficients calculated using Darken's method () using Eq. (9) and the Boltzmann-Matano method () using Eq. (2). The values are consistent, and demonstrate that the intrinsic diffusional flux of U was larger than that of Zr. This is also consistent with observation of marker plane, xm movement towards the U-rich side of the diffusion couple. It should be noted that the pre-exponential factor and activation energy reported in Table 3 for intrinsic and interdiffusion coefficients between 650 and 710 °C were estimated based on Arrhenius relation although the marker plane compositions varied from 62.6 to 69.3 atom percent Zr.
Table 3. Intrinsic diffusion coefficients (DZf and Dv), and interdiffusion coefficients determined by the Darken equation (DD) and the Boltzmann-Matano method (DBM). Pre-exponential factor and activation energy for intrinsic and interdiffusion coefficients between 650 and 710 °C were estimated based on Arrhenius relation although the marker plane compositions varied from 62.6 to 69.3 atom percent Zr.
Fig. 11. Intrinsic diffusion coefficients of U and Zr in (γU,βZr) and δ-UZr2 phases using Heumann method using Eq. (8).
The activity of U in (γU,βZr) solid solution at the marker composition can be estimated based on thermodynamic investigations available in the literature [33,34]. The thermodynamic factor, Φ, was determined from the estimated activities of U and the values were quite consistent with the result reported by Ogata et al. [35]. There was no significant difference in the activities of U and the thermodynamic factors as a function of temperature. Tracer diffusion coefficients and atomic mobilities of U and Zr were estimated using Eq. (10), ignoring the vacancy wind effect. The mobilities of U were higher than those of Zr in (γU,βZr) solid solution at the marker composition. The activity of U, thermodynamic factor, tracer diffusion coefficient, and atomic mobility in (γU,βZr) determined in this study are reported in Table 4.
Table 4. The activity of U, thermodynamic factor Φ, tracer diffusion coefficient Di and atomic mobility βi in the (γU,βZr) solid solution at the marker plane, corresponding to the composition, in atom percent, 30.7U-69.3Zr at 650 °C, 32.5U-67.5Zr at 680 °C, and 37.4U-62.6Zr at 710 °C.
7. Summary
Microstructural and kinetics analyses were carried out for U vs. Zr diffusion couples annealed at 580 °C for 960 h, 650 °C for 480 h, 680 °C for 240 h, and 710 °C for 96 h. The interdiffusion and reaction layers consisted of α-U, α′-phase (α-U variant), δ-UZr2 (at 580 °C), and (γU,βZr) solid solution (at 650 °C, 680 °C and 710 °C). From concentration profiles, the interdiffusion fluxes and coefficients were determined using Boltzmann-Matano analysis. The integrated interdiffusion coefficient was also determined using Sauer-Freise method with Wagner analysis, and activation energies were estimated for α-U and α′-U phases as 252 and 108 kJ/mol, respectively, in the temperature range, 650° to 710 °C. The intrinsic diffusion coefficients of U and Zr were calculated at the marker compositions using Heumann analysis including at 580 °C for the δ-UZr2. Intrinsic diffusion of U was faster than that of Zr consistent with observation of marker shift movement. For the temperature range 650°–710 °C, activation energies of intrinsic diffusion for U and Zr were estimated to be 49 and 51 kJ/mol, respectively, and pre-exponential factor for U and Zr were estimated as 9 × 10−13 and 5 × 10−13, respectively. Tracer diffusion and atomic mobility of U and Zr were also estimated using available thermodynamic data and intrinsic diffusion coefficients.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Materials Threat Reduction (NA-212), National Nuclear Security Administration, under DOE-NE Idaho Operations Office Contract DE-AC07-05ID14517. Accordingly, the U.S. Government retains a non-exclusive, royalty-free license to publish or reproduce the published form of this contribution, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
