<title>Design study of long‐life small modular sodium‐cooled fast reactor</title>
<author>Jinsu Park; Taewoo Tak; T. K. Kim; Jiwon Choe; Yongjin Jeong; Peng Zhang; Deokjung Lee</author>
<Affiliation>Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology UNIST‐gil 50, Eonyang‐eup Ulju‐gun Ulsan 689‐798 Korea ; Argonne National Laboratory 9700 South Cass Avenue Argonne IL 60564 USA</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.3609</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/er.3609</URL>
Summary
This paper presents a new design for a small modular sodium-cooled fast reactor core with an optimized lifetime and reactivity swing through the analysis of various breed-and-burn strategies and its neutronic analyses in terms of active core movements, isotopic mass balance, kinetic parameters, and inherent safety.
The new core design aims at a power level of 260 MW with a long lifetime of 30 years without refueling and a reactivity swing smaller than 1000 pcm. Starting from five initial candidate cores with various breed-and-burn strategies, an optimum core was selected from a combination of the two candidates that shows a proper breeding behavior with the optimized uranium enrichment in the low-enriched uranium region and the optimized size of the blanket region.
The depletion analysis of the new core provides various reactor design parameters such as the core multiplication factor, breeding ratio, heavy metal mass change, power distribution, and summary of neutron balance. In addition, the perturbation analysis provides the reactor kinetic parameters and reactivity feedback coefficients for the inherent safety analysis of the core. The integral reactivity parameters of the quasi-static reactivity balance analysis demonstrate that the new core is inherently safe in cases of unprotected loss of flow, unprotected loss of heat sink, and unprotected transient over power. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1 Introduction
This paper presents a core concept for a new small modular sodium-cooled fast reactor (SMSFR) that combines the advantages of the sodium-cooled fast reactor (SFR) and the small modular reactor (SMR). The SFR is one of the Generation IV reactor concepts 1-5. Many SFR concepts have been proposed to achieve a long-life core by adopting a fast spectrum 6-10. Tak et al. proposed the 2600 MW ultra-long cycle fast reactor (UCFR-1000) for a 60-year operation without refueling and adopting the breed-and-burn (B&B) strategy 6. Constant axial shape of neutron flux, nuclide densities and power shape during life of energy (CANDLE) was designed as an ultra-long-life fast reactor concept by stacking the different fuel material along the axial direction 7. TerraPower Inc. proposed the traveling wave reactor that aimed at an ultra-long-life core by allowing fuel shuffling every 18 to 24 months 8. A conceptual design of a super-safe, small, and simple (4S) reactor was proposed by Toshiba Corp. and CRIEPI to meet design criteria such as negative temperature feedback reactivity coefficients including sodium void worth and a core lifetime longer than 10 years 9. An advanced SFR with a power rate of 100 MWe (AFR-100) was developed, targeting a small electrical grid with a long operation time without refueling 10. On the other hand, the SMR concept provides flexibility in design, siting, and the fuel cycle option, and it can be transported from the prelicensed factories to the remote plant sites 11-13. UCFR-100, which is a small size SFR with a power level of 260 MW, is combined with the UCFR-1000 concept and the SMR concept 14. However, this model is hard to transport to the plant site due to 4.3 m in its diameter.
The SMSFR concept with a power rating of 260 MW, achieves a reactor lifetime (core cycle length) of 28.5 years by adopting a B&B strategy. In order to meet the design objective of both SFR and SMR, the core was designed with the constraint that its diameter should be no more than 3 m so as to make it transportable from a factory to a plant site. Four candidates that have different breeding directions and characteristics were proposed to draw an optimized core concept. The design and analysis for them were performed with the calculation of a fast reactor analysis code suite 15-19 that was developed by Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). In addition, a sensitivity study and an evaluation of reactor design parameters were performed to assess the performance of the optimized reactor core concept.
Using the quasi-static reactivity balance method developed by Wade et al. in the 1980s, the asymptotic core states after unprotected transients can be estimated depending upon the core performance parameters such as the core power, flow, and three integral reactivity coefficients. The detailed descriptions of the main principle and the derivation of the quasi-static reactivity balance method can be found in the references 20-22. By solving a derived quasi-static balance equation using calculated integral reactivity parameters, the inherent safety of the suggested core design was successfully demonstrated.
Section 2 presents the ANL fast reactor analysis code suite. Section 3 describes the five candidate core designs that adopt different B&B strategies. The core behaviors were analyzed to compare the advantages of each core design, and a new SMSFR core design combining the benefits of each core was proposed. Section 4 provides the performance analysis of the new core concept such as the multiplication factor, breeding ratio, mass change of heavy metal, power distribution, summary of neutron balance, and reactivity feedback coefficients. Section 4 demonstrates the inherent safety of the new core through the quasi-static reactivity balance analysis.
2 Fast Reactor Analysis Code System
In this paper, the ANL fast reactor analysis code suite was used for the simulation of the aforementioned new core designs 23. In order to identify the core lifetime and core performance, depletion calculations were carried out. Thirty burnup steps were used for depletion, with each step being 1 year. To obtain the various kinetic parameters and reactivity feedback coefficients, the perturbation theory calculation code, which is included in the ANL code system, was used. Figure 1 shows the entire flow of fast reactor analysis.
Figure 1
Flow of the fast reactor analysis.
2.1 MC2-3: multigroup cross-section generation
The generation of multigroup cross sections for the fast reactor was conducted by MC2-3 15. The multigroup data files were produced specifically for the material composition and core geometry of the selected core design. Generating a multigroup cross section was divided into two steps. The first step is to generate region-wise flux spectra using TWODANT 16, which is a discrete ordinate transport code. The region-wise, ultrafine group macroscopic cross sections generated by MC2-3 for each homogenized assembly are used as input for TWODANT. The broad group macroscopic cross sections are generated by using the region-wise, ultrafine group flux spectra from TWODANT transport solution. The REBUS-3 and DIF-3D codes use these cross sections for nodal calculation and core depletion analysis.
2.2 DIF-3D/REBUS-3: nodal diffusion calculation and fuel cycle analysis
The DIF-3D code was originally developed as a finite difference diffusion theory method for all geometries 17. The nodal method was added to the DIF-3D code to improve the performance of reactor geometries. The REBUS-3 is a system of programs designed for the analysis of fast reactor fuel cycles 18. The fissile Pu content was found to be higher due to the underprediction of the multiplication factor resulting from the leakage overestimation with diffusion. Moreover, an inaccurate flux solution can make further error propagation in depletion calculations in terms of the material compositions and the reactivity coefficient calculations. Although the nodal diffusion method causes errors during depletion calculations, only the DIF-3D/REBUS-3 code system was used for the analysis of various fast reactor cores in order to keep consistency. Therefore, errors from different methodologies did not affect the flow of core analysis or design procedures in this study.
2.3 PERSENT: perturbation and sensitivity analysis
Perturbation theory methods have been developed for a wide range of applications in reactor analysis, which are used for reactivity and sensitivity coefficient calculations in this study. The change of reactivity by introducing perturbations in the system can be expressed by a conventional perturbation equation that requires a combination of the unperturbed forward and adjoint and perturbed forward flux. The solution to the perturbation equation provides the contribution of a given perturbation to the reactivity change. The PERSENT code provides the unique method to compute the reactivity worths, kinetic parameters, and cross-section sensitivities 19.
3 Design Strategy
3.1 Core design
The core design optimization process starts from the initial five SMSFR core designs that have different B&B strategies. In order to satisfy the SMR criteria, the core diameter needs to be smaller than 300 cm. The 280-cm diameter by 100-cm height core contains 144 fuel assemblies, 102 reflector assemblies, and seven control assemblies. The fuel zone is divided into low-enriched uranium (LEU) and blanket regions. The enrichment of LEU region was determined by making initial excess reactivity smaller than 500 pcm. The natural uranium was used for the fuel material of the blanket. There are two types of control assemblies. The first type is a primary control assembly that is used for reactivity control during operation with natural boron as an absorber material, and the second type is a secondary control assembly that is composed of 90% enriched 10B for reactor shutdown. Figure 2 shows the radial layout of the reactor core.
Figure 2
Radial layout of reactor core.
3.1.1 Assembly design parameters
The assemblies in the core are divided into three types: driver, reflector, and control assemblies. The fuel assembly contains 91 fuel pins enclosed by structure material. The fuel pin adopts the vented fuel rod concept 24. The upper part of the cladding has a hole, so that the fission gas is allowed to enter directly into the coolant stream. By adopting the vented fuel rod concept, the pressure of the fuel rod maintains at a low level and prevents the deformation of the cladding during long operation.
Because of the advantage of metallic fuel in the SFR core, U-10Zr is adopted as a fuel material. U-10Zr, as a fuel material, causes less moderation and more neutron production per neutron absorbed in fuel, due to the absence of oxygen atoms, and has a larger thermal conductivity than oxide fuel. At high burnup, the characteristics of U-10Zr fuel pins change considerably, such as in the migration of uranium from central and outer zones to the middle zone and reduction of the melting point by the depletion of zirconium. Also, uranium-based metallic fuels interact chemically with iron-based cladding to form low melting point eutectic alloys. Typically, the metallic fuel shows acceptable performance and reliability up to 10 at% burnup with capability to 20 at% burnup 25-27. Because the fast spectrum reactor has higher fast fluence than commercial pressurized water reactors, the cladding and structure materials will experience higher irradiation. HT-9 is one of the candidate materials for SFR cores due to its excellent thermal conductivity and irradiation resistance. The swelling resistance and adequate high-temperature properties of HT-9 have been confirmed in various irradiation experiments. However, at high burnup, its irradiation embrittlement can occur at low temperatures due to irradiation hardening, radiation-induced precipitation and helium production. For this reason, the HT-9 was used as a material for cladding and structure 28, 29. Sodium is filled in the core as a coolant material. Table I represents the assembly design parameter including the assembly data, pin data, and volume fraction at fabrication. Figure 3 shows the configuration of driver, reflector, and control assembly design.
Table I. Assembly design parameter for SMSFR core.
Driver	Reflector	Control
Assembly data
- Number of pins	91	91	7
- Assembly pitch, cm	16.5	16.5	16.5
- Inter-assembly gap, cm	0.30	0.30	0.30
- Duct thickness, cm	0.30	0.30	0.30
- Gap duct and interior duct, cm	—	—	0.40
- Interior duct thickness, cm	—	—	0.30
- Interior duct inside flat to flat, cm	—	—	14.2
Pin data
- Pin material and type	U-10Zr	HT-9	B4C
- Bond material	Na	—	He
- Active core height, cm	100	—	—
- Smeared density, %TD	75	—	85
- Cladding material	HT-9	—	HT-9
- Clad outer diameter, cm	1.49	1.611	5.01
- Pin pitch-to-diameter ratio	1.075	—	1.028
- Cladding thickness, cm	0.050	—	0.070
Volume fraction at fabrication, %
- Fuel or absorber	43.9	—	46.9
- Bond	14.6	—	8.3
- Structure	16.1	85.7	16.7
- Coolant	25.4	14.3	28.1
Figure 3
Configurations of assembly design.
3.1.2 Core configurations
Figure 4 shows the side view of the fuel distribution of the five core types investigated in this paper. All the analyzed cores are SMRs with the power level of 260 MW. Each core type has different breeding behaviors caused by the position and size of the blanket region, and the uranium enrichment in the fuel pin varies depending on the core type.
Figure 4
Axial fuel distribution of five types of core.
The first core type is a uniform enrichment core. All the fuel assemblies have the same material compositions. The 11.3% enriched uranium is used in the fuel material of U-10Zr. The second core type is an onion zoning core. The fuel of the LEU region uses 12.6% enriched U-10Zr. The natural uranium blanket region is located at the center of the core. Through the depletion, the blanket region will turn into an active core. The third core type is an axial breeding core that originated from the CANDLE reactor. The blanket region is located at the top of the core, so the active core can move to the upper core zone. The fuel of the LEU region is a 13.5% enriched U-10Zr. The fourth core type is an axial-dual breeding core. The blanket region is located at the center of the core, axially enclosed by the top and bottom LEU regions. The fuel of the LEU region is 19.5% enriched U-10Zr. The last core type is a radial breeding core. The fuel assemblies at the second and third rings are the blanket. The blanket region is radially enclosed by the 13.3% enriched LEU region in the outside rings. At the beginning of the core lifetime, active cores are formed in the LEU regions. The active cores gradually move to the blanket regions along with the core operations.
3.2 Core analysis results
Figure 5 shows the effective multiplication factor behaviors over 30 years of depletions for each core type. As a reference core type, type 1 core, that is, the uniform enrichment core, shows a cosine shape trend of the effective multiplication factor. By inserting the blanket fuels into the center region of the core, the initial steep rise of the multiplication factor can be mitigated and the lifetime of the onion zoning core can be extended to about 30 years. Because the SMR core has a small size reactivity control system, the reactivity swing should be smaller than 1000 pcm. The type 5 core, that is, the radial breeding core, shows almost flat effective multiplication factor behaviors. It was noted that the breeding behavior of onion zoning core can make a lifetime longer, and that of the radial breeding core can make the trend of the multiplication factor as flat in shape. Therefore, the new core is created by combining the onion zoning core with the radial breeding core to achieve the 30-year lifetime with a small reactivity swing.
Figure 5
Effective multiplication factors during 30 years.
3.3 A new SMSFR core concept
A new core design is selected by adopting the two kinds of breeding strategies to achieve a small reactivity swing and a lifetime of 28.5 years. The fuel assemblies of the new core design adopt the same assembly design parameters that are used for the five cores. The blanket region of the selected core is located at the center region rings 2 and 3, with 80-cm height. The enrichment of LEU region is 13.2%. The size of the blanket and the enrichment of LEU are optimized through detailed sensitivity analyses of the multiplication factor behaviors over depletion for many different combinations. The test cases include several variations of LEU enrichments and the locations and sizes of blanket regions. Figure 6 shows the radial and axial layouts of the selected core.
Figure 6
Radial and axial core configuration for suggested core design.
4 Performance Analysis
4.1 Core multiplication factor and breeding ratio behavior
Figure 7 shows the core multiplication factor behavior. Because the REBUS-3 code does not model the core geometry variations over the depletion, the core depletion analysis was performed with the geometry of fuel swelling already considered. It was noted that the selected final core can maintain criticality up to 28.5 years by employing the extended onion zoning. At the beginning of life (BOL), the unique zoning strategy with the blanket region at the core center causes higher neutron leakages, and, therefore, the core starts with a smaller effective multiplication factor than the onion zoning core. As the active core moves into the center due to the high breeding at the blanket region, the core can maintain criticality for a longer time than the radial breeding core, without refueling.
Figure 7
Core effective multiplication factor behavior.
Figure 8 shows the core breeding ratio behavior during the core lifetime. In this study, the breeding ratio is defined by the ratio of the fissionable material mass at discharge to the mass at charge. Along the depletion, the breeding occurs at the blanket region, and the active core moves into the center of the core. This active core movement causes the flux to become denser at the center, and it causes more breeding. Because the transuranic materials have a η value, that is, the number of fission neutrons produced per a fissile absorption, greater than 1, the core may maintain criticality with a fissile conversion ratio of less than 1.
Figure 8
Core breeding ratio behavior.
4.2 Mass flow of major isotopes
Table II provides the mass of major fuel isotopes at BOL, middle of life (MOL), and end of life (EOL). The initial heavy metal loading is 21 t, which yields a specific power density of 12.4 MW/t. During 30 years of depletion, 0.3 t of 235U and 0.5 t of 238U were calculated as being consumed. A portion of consumed 238U was bred to fissile Pu that leads the core to keep the criticality. The average discharge burnup of the core is 12.9%.
Table II. Mass flow of major isotopes (kg).
BOL	MOL	EOL
235U	2547	1361	727
238U	18529	17120	15690
239Pu	—	854	1249
240Pu	—	42.1	132.7
241Pu	—	1.56	9.12
4.3 Core normalized power distribution
Figure 9 shows the flow of normalized power distributions during the core lifetime. The red color represents high power region, and the green color means the low power region. The core is projected to produce a power level of 260 MW with a 30-year operation, and the specific power density is 12.4 MW/t. The peak power at BOL and EOL are 130.2 and 141.9 kW/L, respectively. Due to the bottom reflector and the upper venting region, which has a higher portion of sodium, the power peak is inclined to the bottom. As shown in this figure, the active core completely moves from the periphery at BOL to the center of core at EOL. And Figure 10 shows the axial power distributions of the active core at BOL, MOL, and EOL. Because the blanket region is located at the center of the core, the active core does not move axially and the axial power distributions are almost a standing shape.
Figure 9
The normalized power distribution during depletion calculation.
Figure 10
The axial power distribution at BOL, MOL, and EOL.
4.4 Summary of neutron balance
Table III provides the neutron balance summaries at BOL, MOL, and EOL. The reaction rates are normalized to 1.0. The η value increases from 2.023 to 2.355 along the depletion because of the increased fission contributions from the Pu. The neutron leakage decreases as much as 3% because the active core moves in to the core center region. At the same time, the absorption contribution increases due to the fission product buildup. Because the relative fission rate at BOL was obtained after first-step depletion calculation, the fission rate of TRU at BOL is not 0. The relative fission rate of 235U decreases and that of transuranic fissile material increases along with the transuranic isotope buildup over the reactor operations, and the fission fraction of 238U stays nearly constant.
Table III. Summary of neutron balances.
BOL	MOL	EOL
Core multiplication factor, keff	1.00373	1.00761	0.99735
Number of neutron per fissile absorption, η	2.023	2.215	2.355
Normalized reaction rate	Absorption total	0.741	0.745	0.771
-Fissile	0.500	0.457	0.428
-Fertile	0.135	0.139	0.143
-Other	0.106	0.149	0.199
Leakage	0.259	0.255	0.229
Relative fission rate	235U	0.813	0.477	0.251
238U	0.160	0.164	0.160
TRU	0.027	0.358	0.588
4.5 Kinetic parameters and reactivity feedback coefficients
Table IV presents the kinetic parameters and reactivity feedback coefficients calculated using the PERSENT code at BOL, MOL, and EOL. The effective delayed neutron fraction decreases as the burnup increases, due to the composition change of the fuel from uranium to a mixture of uranium and plutonium. Sodium void worth calculation is done by voiding the sodium in the fuel assemblies and venting region. The sodium void worth of the new core is always negative over the core lifetime due to the large neutron leakage associated with the small core size. As the leakage decreases along the operation, the sodium void worth becomes less negative. And the radial and axial expansion coefficients are also negative values, which contribute to the inherent safety of the core. It was noted that the control rod worth is large enough to control the excess reactivity during the operations even with the small number of control assemblies due to the low reactivity swing.
Table IV. Kinetic parameters and reactivity feedback coefficients.
BOL	MOL	EOL
Effective multiplication factor, keff	1.00373	1.00761	0.99735
Effective delayed neutron fraction, βeff	0.00719	0.00535	0.00428
Prompt lifetime	µs	0.279	0.267	0.245
Sodium void worth (85% void)	$	−2.160	−0.819	−0.559
Fuel density coefficient	¢/°C	−0.173	−0.230	−0.298
Structure density coefficient	¢/°C	0.011	0.030	0.046
Sodium density coefficient	¢/°C	−0.043	0.011	0.070
Doppler coefficient	¢/°C	−0.300	−0.272	−0.220
Radial expansion coefficient	¢/°C	−0.158	−0.190	−0.225
Axial expansion coefficient	¢/°C	−1.186	−0.998	−0.920
Primary control rod worth	pcm/cm	−78.286	−71.052	−56.458
Secondary control rod worth	pcm/cm	−3.368	−12.500	−24.741
4.6 Margin of control rod worth
Figure 11 shows the margin of primary, secondary, and total control rod worth during the core lifetime. The margin of control rod worth is calculated by subtracting the excess reactivity from control rod worth. The margin of secondary control rod worth is smaller than that of primary control rod worth due to them being smaller in number than the primary control rods. Because the active core is moved to the core central region from the core peripheral region, the margin of secondary control rod worth, which is located at the center of the core, increases during depletion. At the same time, the margin of primary control rod worth decreases during depletion. Because the enriched 10B in the secondary control rod has a neutron burnable absorber, and because the active core movement makes an increment in the margin of secondary rod worth that is larger than the decrement of margin of primary rod worth, the margin of total control rod worth increases during depletion. Also, it is noted that the margin of primary and secondary control rod worth has a positive value. This indicates that control rods in the core can handle the excess reactivity during reaction operation well.
Figure 11
Margin of control rod worth behavior.
4.7 Integral reactivity parameters for quasi-static reactivity balance
The quasi-static reactivity balance analysis for the suggested core concept was performed to evaluate the safety of the core under unprotected transient conditions. For three unprotected accidents, unprotected loss of flow transient (ULOF), unprotected loss of heat sink (ULOHS), and unprotected transient overpower (UTOP), required conditions for self-controllability of the core are provided in the references 20-22, 30.
The integral reactivity parameter, A, is the net power reactivity decrement. A is calculated by the reactivity decrement due to the fuel temperature rise from the coolant average temperature to the fuel average temperature. B is the power over flow ratio coefficient of reactivity. In other words, the B represents the reactivity decrement experienced when the coolant and fuel temperature rise from the zero power isothermal condition at coolant inlet temperature to the coolant average temperature. The inlet temperature coefficient C can be calculated by summing up the fuel Doppler, fuel axial expansion, sodium density, and radial expansion coefficient. The integral reactivity parameters, A, B, and C, can be calculated by Eqn 1.
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3609:er3609-math-0001
(1)
where
αD
is a fuel Doppler coefficient
αAx
is a fuel axial expansion coefficient
αNa
is a coolant expansion coefficient
αCR
is a control rod driveline thermal expansion coefficient
αRa
is a core radial expansion coefficient
ΔTf
is a difference between the average fuel and average coolant operating temperatures (150 °C), and
ΔTc
is an average coolant temperature rise across the core (155 °C).
There are four criteria SFR cores need to satisfy in order to guarantee self-controllability and attain inherent safety features under the unprotected accident conditions. The first criterion is that the integral reactivity parameters should be negative. The negative A means a negative prompt power coefficient, and the negative B and C mean negative temperature coefficients, respectively. The second criterion is that the ratio of A/B should be smaller than 1. This condition should be satisfied to control the asymptotic temperature rise under the condition of ULOF. The third criterion is that the value of CΔTc/B should lie between 1 and 2. This condition with the above two criteria makes a proper balance between the ULOHS and chilled inlet temperature and thereby assures the inherently safe reactivity control for any conceivable balance of a plant state's state. The last criterion is that the value of ΔρTOP/|B| should be smaller than 1. The ΔρTOP is the maximum reactivity insertion due to a control rod runout. These conditions ensure the inherent reactivity control under the condition of UTOP.
Table V shows the calculated integral reactivity parameters for quasi-static reactivity balance and sufficient conditions to get inherent safety features. As described in the preceding texts, the integral reactivity parameters for the suggested core are all negative, so it satisfies the first criterion. And the next three criteria are also satisfied from the calculation using integral reactivity parameters. Therefore, it is confirmed that the suggested core has favorable inherent safety features.
Table V. Integral reactivity parameters.
BOL	MOL	EOL
A: power coefficient, ¢	−30.99	−35.63	−39.97
B: power/flow coefficient, ¢	−45.01	−48.71	−52.37
C: inlet temperature coefficient, ¢/°C	−0.41	−0.42	−0.42
ΔρTOP: transient over power initiator, ¢	8.61	23.52	10.60
Required conditions to attain inherent safety
A/B < 1	0.69	0.73	0.76
1 < CΔTc/B < 2	1.40	1.33	1.25
ΔρTOP/|B| < 1	0.19	0.48	0.20
5 Conclusion
A new SMSFR core concept that can achieve both a long lifetime and a small reactivity swing without refueling for 28.5 years with the power level of 260 MW is suggested through the analysis of various B&B strategies. An optimum B&B strategy was chosen to obtain a desirable breeding behavior and a required core lifetime from the sensitivity study. The optimization of uranium enrichment in the fuel and the area and position of the blanket region was also carried out in order to achieve the goal of the suggested core.
Various reactor core design parameters have been analyzed, such as the behavior of the multiplication factor and breeding ratio, heavy metal mass flow, normalized power distribution, neutron balance, and neutron spectrum from the depletion calculation. Also, the reactor kinetic parameters and reactivity feedback coefficients were analyzed by the perturbation calculations. The integral parameters for the quasi-static reactivity balance analysis are calculated using the reactivity feedback coefficients and the reactor kinetic parameters, and it was successfully demonstrated that the new core design can attain favorable inherent safety.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (no. NRF-2013M2A8A2078243).
