<title>CuFeAl-composite catalysts of oxidation of gasification products of solid fuels: In situ XAS and XRD study</title>
<author> G. Baston; S. Dickinson; H. Roebuck; H.E. Sims</author>
<Affiliation>Boreskov Institute of Catalysis, Lavrentiev Ave., 5, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia; Novosibirsk State University, Pirogova Str., 2, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia; National Research Centre "Kurchatov Institute", Kurchatova sq. 1, 123182 Moscow, Russia</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2018.11.025</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0969806X18309605?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•
High-active FeAl and CuFeAl composite catalysts were investigated by XAS and XRD.
•
Copper leads to increase the catalytic activity of iron based catalysts.
•
Oxidation of CO over FeAl and CuFeAl catalysts proceeds via redox mechanism.
Abstract
The reduction of high-active FeAl and CuFeAl composite catalysts was investigated in situ by XRD and XAS in the temperature range between 100 and 600 °C. It was found that the fresh catalysts consist of Fe2O3 and Al2O3 phases only. The Al3+ cations partially dissolute in the Fe2O3 lattice. The addition of copper to the Fe-Al catalyst leads to formation of highly dispersed CuO nanoparticles and mixed oxide with a spinel-type crystalline structure similar to that of CuFe2O4. The low-temperature reduction of Cu2+ to Cu0 accelerates the Fe2O3 → Fe3O4 and FeO → Fe0 transformations. In the presence of oxygen we did not observe the reduction of Cu and Fe to the metallic state. This means that the oxidation of CO over FeAl and CuFeAl composite catalysts proceeds via a redox mechanism.
Keywords
In situ XAS,In situ XRD,CuFeAl-composite catalysts,CO oxidation;Catalytic combustion
1. Introduction
Catalytic oxidation of gasification products of solid fuels allows utilizing low-grade fuels such as lignite, peat, and firewood as well as various industrial wastes. Recently, it has been found that catalysts based on iron(III) oxide demonstrate high activity and stability in this process (Fedorov et al., 2018). The authors also showed that Fe2O3-Al2O3 composite catalysts provide good mechanical properties and high specific surface area. Their catalytic activity depends on the Fe concentration and the maximum is achieved when the Fe2O3 content is approximately 82 wt%. The addition of Cu increases the catalytic activity significantly; and the catalyst containing 5% of CuO, 78% of Fe2O3 and 17% of Al2O3 is the most active. These catalysts are inexpensive and ecologically clean that make it promising for industrial applications. In order to understand the reasons of their catalytic activity (especially the role of copper additive) and to improve catalytic performants the mechanism of catalytic process should be elucidated. Since carbon monoxide is the main product of gasification of solid fuels we performed investigation of CuFeAl-composite catalysts in the CO oxidation in a wide temperature range. Unfortunately, ex situ XPS, XRD, and XAS analysis of these catalysts before and after reaction tests cannot elucidate the origin of active species because reduced species may fast oxidize after a contact with air. To avoid this problem, we carried out an in situ study of the catalyst directly under reaction conditions using XRD and XAS. The main advantage of these methods is a possibility to perform measurements at atmospheric pressure. At first we studied the reduction of the CuFeAl-composite catalyst in CO that allows as to understand the phase transformation in the catalysts under reaction conditions. Then, for comparison we performed an in situ XANES and EXAFS study of the reduction of the same catalyst in CO. Finally, we performed an in situ XAS study of the catalyst in the CO oxidation.
2. Experimental
The catalysts were prepared as follows: the salts of the precursors (Fe(NO3)3·9H2O, Al(NO3)3·9H2O, and Cu(NO3)2·3H2O) were mixed in the required ratios, then the mixture was heated to give a homogeneous melt of crystal hydrate salts and was kept at a temperature of 200 °C until water was completely removed; finally, the solid residue was calcined at 700 °C for 1 h in air.
The in situ XRD study was carried out in flow of 1% CO in He using a D8 Advance diffractometer equipped with flow mass controllers and a reactor chamber XRK-900 (Anton Paar GmbH, Austria). The XRD patterns were collected using monochromatic Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The 2θ range from 21° to 60° was scanned with a step of 0.05° and the counting time of 5 s at each point. The reduction was performed in the temperature range from 30 to 700°C with a step of 50 °C; the heating rate was 12 °C/min. The total flow rate was 100 sccm.
The in situ XAS study was performed at the Structural Materials Science beamline at the Kurchatov Synchrotron Radiation Source (National Research Center “Kurchatov Institute”, Moscow, Russia). This source is a 2.5 GeV electron storage ring with an average beam current of 100 mA. The synchrotron radiation was generated by a 1.7 T bending magnet. The experimental station was described in detail elsewhere (Chernyshov et al., 2009). The spectra were obtained at the Cu and Fe K-edges in the transmission mode using a channel-cut Si(111) monochromator. In order to reduce the high-harmonic contamination, the second crystal was mechanically loaded to break the strict parallelism of the crystal planes. The degree of residual harmonic contamination was controlled by a photodiode to be below 0.1%. The sampling step of the XANES parts of the X-ray absorption experiments was 0.5 eV at both Fe and Cu K-edges. The sampling step of the EXAFS parts of the X-ray absorption experiments was adjustable to give Δk= 0.05 Å−1 at both Fe and Cu K-edges. Powder samples were pressed into thin self-supporting pellets, mounted to a stainless steel sample-holder and then placed in a custom-made reaction chamber for in situ XAS measurements. To obtain an appropriate X-ray absorption, the samples were diluted by a fine powder of hexagonal BN. Two ionization chambers, filled with appropriate N2-Ar mixtures to achieve 20% and 80% absorbance for I0 and It, respectively, were used as detectors. The ionization currents were measured by Keithley 6487 digital picoamperemeters (Keithley Instruments LLC, USA). Energy calibration was performed using the first inflection point in the Cu K-edge spectra of samples under study at 8979 eV and in the Fe K-edge spectra – at 7112 eV. The absorption gap was normalized in the range 0–1 on the absorption maximum. The radial pair distribution functions around the Cu atoms were obtained by the Fourier transform of the k2-weighted EXAFS functions over the range of photoelectron wave numbers 2.2–8.0 Å−1; the radial pair distribution functions around the Fe atoms were obtained by the Fourier transform of the k3-weighted EXAFS functions over the range of photoelectron wave numbers 2.2–12.0 Å−1. The obtained data were analyzed using the DEMETER software (Ravel and Newville, 2005). The reduction process was studied in flow of 5% CO in N2 at atmospheric pressure in the temperature range from RT to 600 °C by the stepwise manner. For study the CO oxidation, oxygen flow was added to the reactant mixture using flow mass controllers. The total flow rate was 200 sccm in the both cases.
3. Results and discussion
The reduction of high-active Fe82Al18 (82% of Fe2O3 and 18% of Al2O3) and Cu5Fe78Al17 (78% of Fe2O3, 5% of CuO, and 17% of Al2O3) composite catalysts have been investigated by XRD. Ex situ analysis indicated that fresh catalysts consist of α-Fe2O3 and γ-Al2O3 phases only; Al3+ cations partially dissolute in the hematite lattice. In situ XRD measurements were used to study the phase transition of iron-containing phase during the reduction in a CO flow. It has been found that in case of Fe82Al18 the reduction of iron(III) oxide by CO proceeds via two routes. The first route is a direct two-stage reduction of iron(III) oxide to metal (Fe2O3 → Fe3O4 → Fe), and the second one is an indirect three-stage reduction with formation of FeO intermediate phases (Fe2O3 → Fe3O4 → FeO → Fe). Comparison the reduction of Fe2O3 and Fe82Al18 allow us to establish that introduction of Al stabilizes the small Fe3O4 particles and prevents further sintering of the iron oxide (XRD patterns are not shown). We believe that the mechanism of stabilization is associated with the formation of Fe3-xAlxO4 solid solution. In situ XRD patterns of Cu5Fe78Al17 obtained during the heating in a flow of 1%CO/99%He gas mixture are presented in Fig. 1. Heating from 30 to 600°C leads to the transformations similar to those for the reduction of pure Fe2O3 and Fe82Al18 but the presence of Cu decrease the temperature of phase transitions. The reduction of Fe2O3 to Fe3O4 begins at 275 °C and 100% of Fe2O3 reduces even at 350 °C (in case of Fe82Al18 this temperature of is 450 °C). In addition, the diffraction peaks of FeAl2O4 are observed at 650–700 °C. Metallic copper is also detected but only at 600–700 °C. In the other words the copper containing phases could be detected only at high temperatures. This means that initially copper containing phases exist in amorphous state or nanoparticles.
Fig. 1. The XRD patterns of Cu5Fe78Al17 obtained in CO flow at different temperatures.
To obtain more detailed information about the reduction process Cu5Fe78Al17 was studied by XANES and EXAFS directly during heating in the CO flow. Fig. 2 represents a series of Cu and Fe K-edges XANES and EXAFS spectra collected during exposing Cu5Fe78Al17 in CO at different temperatures. We found that the fresh CuFeAl-composite catalyst consists of CuFe2O4, CuO, and Fe2O3 using the linear combination fitting (LCF) method (Gaur et al., 2009, Hsiao et al., 2001), and Al2O3.
Fig. 2. In situ Cu (a, b) and Fe (c, d) K-edges XANES (a, c) and EXAFS (b, d) spectra of Cu5Fe78Al17 obtained in the CO flow at different temperatures.
The Cu and Fe K-edge XANES data reveal a gradual change in the shape of the XANES spectra with temperature (Fig. 2). Even though it was complicated to perform XAS analysis of the sample at the Cu K-edge due to the low concentration of copper ions we determined that the reduction of copper from Cu2+ to Cu1+ and Cu0 started at temperature about 200 °C; at 600 °C copper is mainly in the metallic state (Kau et al., 1987, Wang et al., 2004). At the same time the reduction of iron started at temperature near 400 °C and at 600 °C approximately 20% of iron is in the metallic state (Carraro et al., 2017, Piquer et al., 2014).
For all Fourier transforms Fe K-edge EXAFS spectra, the first peak arises from the scattering of the nearest neighbor oxygen anions while the second large peak is caused by the scattering of the second nearest neighbor transition metal cations, and oxygen anions of Cu ferrite within the spinel crystal structure. It can be clearly seen that the occupation in cation sites tends to monotonically decrease from room temperature to 500 °C as a consequence of thermal and structural disorder. Then the peak corresponded iron atoms in the metallic state of Fe appears at 600 °C. It means that the phase transition occurs between 500 and 600 °C confirming XRD and XANES data. Fourier transform modulus of the Cu K-edge EXAFS spectra demonstrate decreasing the first peak rapidly and simultaneously increasing the second peak at about 2.2 Å after heating to 300 °C indicating that the high dispersed copper oxides have been reduced to metallic copper. However, these small copper particles cannot be detected by XRD but agglomeration occurs at higher temperatures and allows us to control copper state.
Finally we performed in situ XAS study of the chemical state of Fe and Cu in the CO and O2 mixture with CO:O2 = 2:1 at different temperatures. We found that the reduction of copper from Cu2+ to Cu1+ started at temperature near 400 °C. And it should be stressed that no any copper in the metallic state was observed, moreover, at 600 °C approximately 50% of copper is in the Cu1+ state. At the same time, Fe3+ cations were slightly reduced to Fe2+ at 600 °C (Fig. 3). Thus, in the presence of oxygen the reoxidation of copper and iron cations take place. Also it should be noted that following increase of the partial pressure of O2 leads to shift initial reduction temperature of copper to high temperature range, to decrease part of Cu1+ state at 600 °C, and no changing the oxidation state of iron.
Fig. 3. In situ Cu (a) and Fe (b) K-edges XANES spectra of Cu5Fe78Al17 obtained in the CO:O2 = 2:1 mixture at different temperatures.
Hence, the obtained results allow us to speculate that the oxidation of CO over the CuFeAl-composite catalysts proceeds via the redox mechanism: CO oxidizes by oxygen from the lattices of iron and copper oxides to produce CO2 and oxygen from the gas phase oxidizes the reduced oxides.
4. Conclusion
In this study we have used the complementary methods (XANES, EXAFS, and XRD) for study the catalysts under reaction conditions. This approach allows us to determine the chemical state of copper and iron, phase composition of the catalyst during the reduction by CO and in the oxidation of CO. We found that the addition of Cu to FeAl-composite catalysts leads to formation of highly dispersed CuO particles that could easy reduce to metal in CO flow even at low temperature that increases the reducibility. In case of CO oxidation the reoxidation of copper and iron cations was observed. These facts can facilitate to clarify the mechanism of oxidation of CO. Also the used approach based on the combined application in situ XRD and XAS will be very promising route to obtain detailed information about the state of catalyst under reaction conditions.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation, grant #17-73-20157.
Declarations of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.