<title>Investigating bubble dynamics in a semi-cylindrical gas-solid fluidized bed</title>
<author> S.M. Okhovat-Alavian; J. Behin; N. Mostoufi</author>
<Affiliation> Faculty of Petroleum and Chemical Engineering, Razi University, Kermanshah P.C. 67149, Iran; School of Chemical Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, P.O. Box 11155-4563, Tehran, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Powder Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier BV</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.powtec.2020.05.032</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S003259102030396X?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•
No effect of column cross-section (semi-circular and circular) on the gas-solid distribution and bubble dynamics was observed.
•
Increase in the particle size leads to increase in the bubble phase fraction, aspect ratio, size and rise velocity of bubble.
•
Semi-cylindrical fluidized bed contains spherical bubbles at low gas velocity but elongated ones appear at higher velocities
•
Semi-cylindrical fluidized bed is useful for hydrodynamics investigation of fluidized bed instead of two dimensional
Abstract
Bubble dynamics (i.e., bubble shape, bubble size, bubble rise velocity) and bed voidage in a semi-cylindrical gas-solid fluidized bed at various superficial gas velocities and particle sizes were measured by fiber optic probe and image analysis. Measurements in the semi-cylindrical bed were compared with those in the cylindrical bed to investigate the similarity of two fluidized beds and verifying whether a semi-cylindrical bed can be used for measuring hydrodynamic properties of fluidized beds. Experiments were carried out in two Plexiglas semi-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds of 14 cm in diameter at ambient pressure and temperature. Glass beads of various sizes (120, 290 and 450 μm) were used as the bed material. The superficial gas velocity was varied in the range of 0.2–0.8 m/s and both beds were operating in the bubbling fluidization regime. It was shown that increase in the particle size leads to decrease in the emulsion phase fraction while increases the fraction of bubble phase. At low gas velocity, the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed contains normal bubbles while at higher superficial gas velocity, elongated bubbles with normal rising velocity can be found. Increase in the particle size leads to increase in the aspect ratio of bubbles. It was found that the average bubble size and rise velocity increases with increasing particle size and superficial gas velocity. Results indicated that the gas-solid distribution, bubble rise velocity and bubble size in both beds are similar and geometry of the cross-section of column (semi-circular and circular) has no significant effect on these parameters. It was shown that the hydrodynamics of both beds are very similar and the difference is negligible. Since measuring the bubble size and rise velocity in the semi-cylindrical bed can be easily done by visual observation compared to those in a cylindrical bed, using a semi-cylindrical fluidized bed instead of two dimensional fluidized bed in the laboratory scale is the preferred choice which provides bubble dynamics close to that in a three-dimensional bed.
Keywords
Semi-cylindrical fluidized bed；Bubble dynamics；Fiber optic probe；Digital image analysis
1. Introduction
Fluidized beds, due to their uniform temperature distribution, high mass/heat transfer rates and low pressure drop, are used for various operations such as mixing, catalytic and non-catalytic reactions, drying, and adsorption [1,2]. Almost every aspect of fluidized beds operating in the bubbling regime, including gas interchange rate between phases, gas and particle residence times, reaction conversion, particle entrainment and elutriation, and mass and heat transfer rates, are significantly controlled by the bubble characteristics such as size, shape, and velocity [[3], [4], [5]]. Accordingly, a lot of effort has been spent on measuring and characterization of bubbles [6,7]. Many researches have focused on the development of various correlations for predicting size and velocity of bubbles. According to Karimipour and Pugsley [6], the correlation of Mori and Wen [8] for Geldart B particles and perforated plate distributor is preferable for calculating the bubble size in three-dimensional gas-solid fluidized beds. Also, they reported that the correlation of Davidson and Harrison [9] provides the best estimation of bubble rise velocity in three-dimensional gas-solid fluidized beds for Geldart B particles.
Visual observation of bubbles and their motion in three-dimensional fluidized beds is difficult. Although two-dimensional fluidized beds are proper for direct visual observation, the results from these beds are qualitative and cannot be directly applied in three-dimensional fluidized beds. In this regard, the idea of employing the semi-cylindrical beds to observe jets in fluidized and spouted beds has been proposed [[10], [11], [12]]. Results proved that the semi-cylindrical beds allow direct observation of in-bed phenomena with minor wall interactions [13]. Hatate et al. [11] founded that the bubble movements can be directly observed in a semi-cylindrical fluidized bed as in a two dimensional bed. They also reported that the correlations for size and rise velocity of bubbles in cylindrical beds, provided by Darton et al. [14] and by Allahwala [15], respectively, can be applied to the semi-cylindrical fluidized beds. Singh et al. [16] and Singh and Roy [17,18] experimentally investigated the bed expansion/ fluctuation ratio and the minimum bubbling velocity in semi-cylindrical, hexagonal, square and cylindrical gas-solid fluidized beds. They developed correlations for these parameters in non-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds using the dimensional analysis. Experimental results showed that the bed fluctuation ratio is maximum in the square fluidized bed and minimum in the semi-cylindrical bed. They also reported that the minimum bubbling velocity is maximum in semi-cylindrical and hexagonal fluidized beds and minimum in the square bed. Sahoo et al. [19] studied the effects of static bed height, size and density of particles on the bed dynamics in a semi-cylindrical fluidized bed, experimentally and computationally. They developed correlations for bed fluctuations and expansion by the dimensional analysis.
As discussed above, it can be concluded that the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed can be utilized for direct visual observation of bubbles in the same way of a two-dimensional fluidized bed from its flat wall. Moreover, the measured quantities are close to those in three-dimensional beds and more accurate than the values measured in a two-dimensional fluidized bed. This study accomplishes a previous study [20] on investigating the qualitative and quantitative properties of two fluidized beds to understand the similarities of two beds. In the present work, attempt was made to study bed voidage and bubble dynamics (i.e., bubble shape, bubble size, bubble rise velocity) in a gas-solid semi-cylindrical fluidized bed at various superficial gas velocities and particle sizes and compare the results with those in a cylindrical fluidized bed. Studying the qualitative and quantitative differences between the two fluidized beds would indicate if the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed can be employed for accurate measurement of hydrodynamic properties of cylindrical fluidized bed instead of qualitative measurements in two dimensional fluidized bed in the laboratory scale. For this purpose, two semi-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds were employed to investigate the effect of the cross section of the column on the bubble dynamics.
2. Experiments
Experiments were carried out in two gas-solid fluidized beds, a semi-cylindrical and a cylindrical bed, at ambient conditions. Both columns were made of Plexiglas with a diameter of 14 cm and were filled with glass beads as the bed material. Only the cross section of the two columns were different (semi-circular and circular), but they were the same in other dimensions. Geometries of both beds are given in Table 1. Air was entered into the column through a perforated plate distributor, and its flow rate was adjusted by a mass flow controller. The superficial gas velocity was in the range of 0.2–0.7 m/s, covering the bubbling fluidization regime. In order to investigate the effect of particle size on the bubble dynamics in both beds, experiments were conducted with three glass bead sizes of 120, 290 and 450 μm (Geldard B). The static bed height was 21 cm (L/D = 1.5) in all cases. Properties of the glass beads are presented in Table 2.
Table 1. Geometric measures of semi-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds.
Type of column	Semi-cylindrical	Cylindrical
Internal diameter (cm)	14	14
Height (m)	1	2
Distributor plate	Perforated	Perforated
Holes	217	435
Triangle pitch (mm)	7	7
Table 2. Properties of glass beads.
Particles	Density (kg/m3)	Diameter (μm)	Umf (m/s) [39]	Uc (m/s) [40]
Glass bead І	2500	120	0.014	0.72
Glass bead ІІ	2500	290	0.082	1.01
Glass bead ІІІ	2500	450	0.196	1.19
A reflection type fiber optic probe was used to measure the local voidage, bubble size and bubble rise velocity in the cylindrical fluidized bed. Also, the local bed voidage in semi-cylindrical fluidized bed was determined by fiber optic probe. The fiber optic probe consisted of three transmitting and two receiving fiber bundles, each with a diameter of 250 μm, placed in parallel. When particles touch the tip of the probe, the minimum voltage signal (close to zero) would be generated and when the tip is in a bubble, the maximum voltage (approximately 4 V) would be produced. The fiber optic probe was placed at 14 cm (L/D = 1) above the distributor and 7 cm inside the bed, in both beds. The probe data were recorded for 3 min in each point at a frequency of 10 kHz in order to detect all existing phenomena in the fluidized beds.
A Gopro (model Hero 4 Black) digital video camera was used to measure the bubble size and bubble rise velocity in the semi-cylindrical bed by the digital image technique analysis. This camera had a resolution of 1080 pixels and captured images at the rate of 120 frames per second. The video camera was positioned in front of the flat side of the semi-cylindrical column at 20 cm above the distributor. In this way, the whole column height was captured by the video camera. Duration of each filming was 30 s.
3. Data analysis
3.1. Fiber optic data analysis
Passing of each bubble in front of the fiber optic probe results in a peak in the response signal of each receiving bundle. For each bubble passage through the probe, two successive peaks appear in the signals of the first and second bundle, respectively. Accordingly, if a bubble touches the probe, two similar signals which are distinguished by a time delay would be produced. The time delay between signals was obtained by the cross-correlation method [21] and was used to calculate the axial bubble rise velocity as follows [22,23]:
(1)@
where Le is the effective distance between bundles. Effective distance between bundles was calculated using a black rotating disk with glass beads glued to it. This calibration method is described in detail by Kulah et al. [24]. The sampling frequency for calibration was 60 kHz and the distance between bundles was evaluated to be 1.31 mm.
Once the bubble rise velocity is known, the bubble size can be estimated from [25,26]:
(2)@
where tflg is the bubble flight time, which is the time when the bubble passes through the first bundle.
The local voidage was calculated simultaneously by the fiber optic probe in both semi-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds. Through averaging the output signals from one bundle over time and using the calibration equation for that bundle, the local voidage was measured. The probe was calibrated for this purpose before the experiments by the method described by Kulah et al. [24]. In this method, various mixtures of original glass beads and black glass beads with different ratios were used. Since the black particles absorb most of the light, they can be assumed as voids [27,28]. The relationship between the voltage and bed voidage for all bundles is shown in Fig. 1. As can be seen in this figure, the relation between voltage and voidage is linear and the line demonstrates the calibration line for voidage.
Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (86KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Calibration line for bed voidage.
3.2. Digital image analysis
Images obtained by the video camera from the flat side of the semi-cylindrical column were digitally processed to determine the bubble size and velocity. Fig. 2 illustrates an example of the image processing steps. Fig. 2 (a) illustrates the original image. The first step in image analysis is distinguishing bubbles from emulsion through adjusting a threshold to make sufficient contrast between the two phases. The original image was thus converted into a black and white image, considering a threshold value for the pixel intensity of the grayscale images. Based on the distribution of voidage (as will be shown in results), the value of 0.7 was chosen as threshold for distinction between voigade of bubble and emulsion. According to the method described by Busciglio et al. [29], the threshold value for pixel intensity of grayscale in image processing was set to 0.5 in this work. Such a transformation is shown in Fig. 2 (b).
Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (179KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Digital image analysis in the semi-cylindrical bed: (a) original image; (b) grayscale image.
To ensure an appropriate comparison between the bubble charactersict results in the semi-cylindrical fludized bed (using the digital image analysis) and cylindrical fluidized beds (using the fiber optic probe), only bubbles with the center at 14 cm above the distributor plate were considered by the above mentioned method in the digital image. Once a bubble was detected, its properties, such as aspect ratio, size, and rise velocity were calculated. The bubble aspect ratio is defined as:
@(3)
where Dy and Dx are the vertical and horizontal extremes, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Bubble dimensions.
The bubble size, Db, was determined from the area occupied by the bubble in the digital image, Ab, as:
@(4)
The bubble rise velocity, Vb, was determined by the time difference between the frames when the center of bubble moves vertically from 13 cm to 15 cm. Thus, the bubble rise velocity was calculated from:
@(5)
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Distribution of local bed voidage
The probability density function of bed voidage was analyzed to quantitatively identify the gas–solid distribution and its dependence on the geometry of fluidized bed at various particle sizes. The probability density function of the local voidage in semi-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds of 450 μm particles at superficial gas velocity of 0.6 m/s are plotted in Fig. 4. The distribution exhibits two peaks between εmf and 1 regardless of the size of particles. The first peak at low voidages corresponds to the emulsion phase and the second peak at high voidages is related to the bubble phase [30]. It can be seen in Fig. 4 that the probability density functions of bed voidages in both beds are identical which suggests that the gas–solid distribution in these beds are the same and the cross section of the fluidized bed does not affect the gas–solid distribution.
Fig. 4. Probability density function of local bed voidage in semi-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds of 450 μm particles at superficial gas velocity of 0.6 m/s.
Fig. 5 shows the probability density function of the local voidage in semi-cylindrical fluidized beds of different particles at superficial gas velocity of 0.6 m/s. This figure demonstrates that the particle size can significantly change the distribution. According to Fig. 5, with increasing the particle size, probability of the emulsion phase decreases and that of the bubble phase increases. In fact, the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed of smaller particles exhibits a higher probability at and close to εmf, while the bed with larger particles has a low probability in this region. In other words, the hydrodynamics of the bed alters by increasing the particle size through decreasing the emulsion phase, which is more diluted. Therefore, emerging higher voidages in the bed of larger particles causes increase in the fraction of the bubble phase. It is worth mentioning that by comparing the results of probability density function of FCC with those of sand particles, a similar trends can be found [31,32].
Fig. 5. Probability density function of local bed voidage in the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed of different particle size at superficial gas velocity of 0.6 m/s.
4.2. Time-averaged voidages
To further realize the effect of cross section of the fluidized bed on the two-phase flow structure, time-averaged emulsion and bubble voidages were calculated at various gas velocities and compared with empirical correlation of Cui et al. [31], which are illustrated in Fig. 6. According to Cui et al. [31], the boundary between emulsion and bubble phases was considered to be the voidage at the minimum probability value between the two peaks in the probability density function of voidage. This value is expressed as the division voidage between emulsion and bubble phases and is shown by εdiv. According to Fig. 6, the emulsion carries more gas than at the minimum fluidization condition (voidage greater than εmf) and the bubbles contain particles (voidage less than 1) in both fluidized beds. Moreover, it can be seen in this figure that the time-averaged emulsion and bubble voidages increase with increasing the superficial gas velocity close to the minimum fluidization condition and reach a constant value at high gas velocities. A similar trend was reported by Cui et al. [31,32] for 385 μm sands particles. Increasing the gas velocity leads to presence of a higher amount of gas in the bed, which contributes to diluting the emulsion phase and forming bubbles. As a result, the time-averaged emulsion and bubble voidages increase with increasing the superficial gas velocity. Also, Fig. 6 reveals that the time averaged emulsion and bubble voidages in both beds are almost identical at a specific superficial gas velocity and experimental results are in agreement with those obtained from the empirical correlation [31]. The difference between experimental and calculated values in this figure can be attributed to the difference in the shape of particles (spherical in this work and irregular sand in work conducted by Cui et al. [31,32]). It can be concluded from Fig. 6 that the void fractions of bubble and emulsion are independent of the cross section of the fluidized bed.
Fig. 6. Effect of column geometry on time-averaged emulsion and bubble phase voidages of fluidized bed of 450 μm at different superficial gas velocities.
4.3. Bubble shape
Aspect ratio is a key factor that can specify an approximate shape for the bubble and strongly influences the dynamics of bubbles [33]. Typical shape of bubbles in a bubbling fluidized bed is mushroom form due to the existence of a wake region behind the bubble [29]. Since in this work, the aspect ratio is defined as the ratio of vertical to chord of the bubble, a vertically stretched bubble would exhibit an aspect ratio greater than unity. Conversely, a horizontally stretched bubble would exhibit resulted in an aspect ratio less than unity. Snapshots taken in the semi-cylindrical bed for representing these three groups of bubbles are presented in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. Snapshots of three types of bubbles in the semi-cylindrical bed (a) AR < 1, (b) AR = 1, (c) AR > 1.
The mean bubble aspect ratio against excess gas velocity in the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed of various particle sizes is shown in Fig. 8. This figure demonstrates that the aspect ratio increases with increasing the superficial gas velocity. Similar trend was reported in a two dimensional gas solid fluidized bed by Asegeheng et al. [33]. According to Fig. 8, normal bubbles with spherical cap are presented in the bed at low to moderate excess gas velocities. By increasing the superficial gas velocity, bubbles stretch vertically and elongated bubbles with normal rising velocity are formed for all cases. This change is due to higher interaction of bubbles and their coalescence, as a result of lower distance between bubbles by increasing the superficial gas velocity. Small bubbles in the bed are nearly circular. However, larger bubbles become more flat, distorted and elongated in order to experience less drag force [[33], [34], [35]]. According to their shape, Hatano et al. [34] classified bubbles in two groups, (a) normal spherical cap bubbles with aspect ratio less than average (usually greater than 0.67), (b) elongated bubbles with aspect ratio greater than average (usually greater than 1.2). Fig. 8 also shows that the aspect bubble ratio in a bed of larger particles is greater in both beds compared to the bed of smaller particles, which is in agreement with the results reported by Asegeheng et al. [33]. This trend implies that bubbles are more vertically stretched in the bed of larger particles and can be explained by formation of larger bubbles in the bed with increasing the particle size [35]. As discussed before, bubbles are larger in beds of larger particles, thus feel a greater drag force. Consequently, larger bubbles increases become more elongated vertically along the bed to decrease the drag force. In other words, bubbles with higher aspect ratio are formed in the bed of larger particles at a specific excess gas velocity.
Fig. 8. Aspect ratio of bubbles in the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed of different particle size against the excess gas velocity. Error bars for 120 μm glass beads represent the standard deviation.
4.4. Bubble rise velocity
According to Karimipour and Pugsley [6], the formula proposed by Davidson and Harrison [9] provides the best estimation of bubble rise velocity in three-dimensional gas-solid fluidized beds for Geldart B particles. Bubble rise velocity measured at 14 cm above the distributor in semi-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds of 450 μm particles at various superficial gas velocities are compared with the correlation of Davidson and Harrison [9] in Fig. 9. Evidently, by increasing the superficial gas velocity, the bubble rise velocity increases in both fluidized beds [35]. Increasing in the superficial gas velocity leads to formation of higher number of bubbles with larger sizes due to higher bubble contacts and bubble coalescence rate [36]. Consequently, faster bubbles forms in the bed by increasing the superficial gas as a consequence of increase in the buoyance force acts on the bubble [2]. Moreover, faster bubbles cause a higher rate of interaction among bubbles which leads to faster coalescence and generation of a wide range of bubble size and rise velocity [37]. Hence, larger error bars for the bubble rise velocity can be expected at higher superficial gas velocities. It can be seen in Fig. 9 that the experimental bubble rise velocities in both fluidized beds are in good agreement with those predicted by Davidson and Harrison [9]. Also, the bubble rise velocities in both beds are very close, with no meaningful difference. However, there are small differences between bubble rise velocity which is slightly higher in the semi-cylindrical bed. This fact can be confirmed with the result presented in the previous study [20] that at the same superficial gas velocity, standard deviations of pressure fluctuations for each particle size are of the same order in both beds. This trend indicates that size of bubbles in beds of similar particles are the same at a constant superficial gas velocity, regardless of the geometry of the column. In addition, based on PSDFs of pressure fluctuations in both beds, it was shown that there was a slight difference between the macro structures (large bubbles) in the two geometries. The small difference occurs because of the flat wall in the semi-cylindrical bed that leads to less space for bubble movements in this bed compared to the cylindrical bed. Therefore, bubble fraction in the semi-cylindrical bed becomes slightly greater than that in the cylindrical bed which causes more bubble contacts and higher bubble coalescence rate in this bed. In other words, in the semi-cylindrical bed, bubbles reach the maximum sizes sooner and more large bubbles are formed compared with the cylindrical bed at a specified superficial gas velocity [20]. Consequently, bubble rise velocity in the semi-cylindrical bed is slightly higher than in the cylindrical bed. Since the difference between bubble rise velocities in both beds is very small, it can be concluded that the cross section of the column (semi-circular or circular) has no significant effect on the bubble rise velocity.
Fig. 9. Bubble rise velocity in semi-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds of 450 μm particles at various superficial gas velocities. Error bars for cylindrical bed represent the standard deviation.
Fig. 10 illustrates the bubble rise velocity measured at 14 cm above the distribution of the semi-cylindrical bed against excess gas (Ug-Umf). This figure shows that increasing in the particle size and excess gas result in the increasing the bubble rise velocity. Bubbles are larger in the fluidized bed of larger particles [35,38], as discussed above, increase in the bubble size leads to increase in bubble coalescence rate as a consequence of more bubble interactions, which is the same reason for increase in the bubble rise velocity with increase in the excess gas. At the same particle size, more bubble interaction and coalescence rate of bubble stock in the bed by increase in excess gas, which causes formation of faster bubbles.
Fig. 10. Bubble rise velocities against excess gas velocity measured at 14 cm above the distributor in the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed.
4.5. Average bubble size
The empirical correlation of Mori and Wen [8] for Geldart B particles and perforated plate distributor is the most appropriate correlation for calculating the bubble size in three-dimensional gas-solid fluidized beds [6]. Fig. 11 demonstrates the average bubble size measured at 14 cm above distributor as a function of superficial gas velocity in the semi-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds of 450 μm particles as well as the corresponding values evaluated from the correlation of Mori and Wen [8]. This figure shows that, increase in the superficial gas velocity results in increasing the mean bubble size in both fluidized beds due to increase in the bubble coalescence rate [37]. Moreover a larger error bars can be seen at higher superficial gas velocities due to coalescence of bubbles with various sizes and generation of a wide range of bubble sizes by increasing the superficial gas velocity [37]. Fig. 11 shows that the average bubble size in both beds are in close agreement with those estimated by Mori and Wen [8]. Also, it can be found from this figure that, at each superficial gas velocity, the average bubble sizes in semi-cylindrical and cylindrical beds are very close. As mentioned before, average bubble size was determined in the semi-cylindrical bed and cylindrical bed using fiber optic probe and digital image analysis, respectively. Although, bubble chord length and equivalent diameter are not exactly the same, but they are correlated their distributions are very similar [7]. Accordingly, and based on the error bars shown in Fig. 11, it can be concluded that average bubble size in both beds are comparable. However, bubble sizes in semi-cylindrical bed are slightly greater than in cylindrical one. According to Okhovat et al. [20], the bubble coalescence rate in the semi-cylindrical bed is slightly higher than that in the cylindrical bed as a result of the flat wall in the semi-cylindrical bed. As mentioned before, bubbles reach the maximum size sooner in this bed and number of large bubbles in the semi-cylindrical bed is slightly greater than that in cylindrical one. Therefore, the average size of bubbles in the semi-cylindrical bed is slightly higher than in the cylindrical bed. However, the difference between the two beds is very small such that it can be practically ignored. Hence, within the range of experimental error, the bubble sizes are nearly independent of the cross section (semi-circular or circular) of fluidized beds at constant particle size and superficial gas velocity.
Fig. 11. Average bubble size in semi-cylindrical and cylindrical fluidized beds of 450 μm particles at various superficial gas velocities. Error bars for cylindrical bed represent the standard deviation.
Fig. 12 shows the average bubble size measured at height of 14 cm above the distributor of semi-cylindrical fluidized bed against excess gas. Increase in the average bubble size with increasing the particle size and excess gas can be seen in this figure. As mention before, a bed with larger particles contains larger bubbles due to higher bubble coalescence rate [35,37].
Fig. 12. Average bubble size measured at 14 cm above the distributor in the semi-cylindrical bed for various particle sizes as a function of excess gas velocity.
Distribution of bubble size in the semi-cylindrical bed for various particle sizes at the excess gas velocity Ug-Umf = 0.5 m/s is shown in Fig. 13 (a) and in a bed of 450 μm particles at various superficial gas velocities is presented at Fig. 13 (b). Fig. 13(a) demonstrates that the distribution of bubble sizes become wider and deviates from unit modal with increasing the particle size. At the same excess gas, a narrow range of bubble size with higher number of bubbles (higher probability) exists in bed of smaller particles due to the fact that most of the bubbles are in the same sizes. By increasing in the particle size at a given excess gas, bubble interactions increase further in the beds of larger particles due to formation of larger bubbles in these beds. More bubble interactions cause more bubble coalescence with various sizes, hence the fluidized beds of larger particle contain wider range of bubble sizes at the same excess gas. Therefore, wider distribution of bubble sizes without a sharp peak can be seen in Fig. 13(a) at the larger particle size. Similar trend can be seen in Fig. 13(b), the bubble size distribution becomes wider and its peak becomes shorter and less distinguished by increasing the superficial gas velocity. This reveals that higher number of larger bubbles with various sizes form in the semi-cylindrical bed with increasing the superficial gas velocity. As discussed before, this is due to higher bubble interactions and bubble coalescence rate which leads to formation of larger bubbles with more various sizes. Consequently, sharper distribution of bubble sizes can be seen for low superficial gas velocity while the wider one is for high superficial gas velocity.
Fig. 13. Distribution of bubble size measured at height of 14 cm above the distributor of semi-cylindrical fluidized bed (a) for various particle sizes at Ug-Umf = 0.5 m/s (a) for various superficial gas velocities in a bed of 450 μm particles.
5. Conclusions
The bubble dynamics in a gas–solid semi-cylindrical fluidized bed was investigated and compared with that in a cylindrical fluidized bed in the bubbling fluidization regime. Effects of particle size and superficial gas velocity on bed voidage, bubble shape, average bubble size and bubble rise velocity were studied. Experimental average bubble size and bubble rise velocity were compared with the existing correlations in literature and it was shown that these correlations can be used for predicting the corresponding values in a semi-cylindrical fluidized beds.
The semi-cylindrical fluidized bed can be used for direct visual observation of bubble dynamics through its flat wall. Results showed that gas–solid distribution in both beds are similar at the same operation condition. Increase in the particle size leads to decrease in the emulsion phase fraction while increases the fraction of bubble phase. This trend was confirmed by the results obtained for time averaged emulsion and bubble phase voidages in both beds, which were in the same order in both beds. It was found that at low gas velocity, the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed contains normal bubbles with spherical cap while at higher velocities, elongated bubbles with normal rising velocity are formed. Moreover, the aspect ratio of bubbles is greater in the semi-cylindrical bed of larger particles as compared to the smaller particles. Also, it was shown that average bubble size and rise velocity increases with increasing particle size and superficial gas velocity in both beds due to increase in bubble coalescence rate. No significant effect of cross-section of the column (semi-circular and circular) on average bubble size and rise velocity was observed. Correlation of Mori and Wen [8] for bubble size estimation, developed for bubbling three-dimensional fluidized beds, was found to be valid for the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed. The same was found for bubble rise velocity that the correlation of Davidson and Harison [9] can be applicable to semi-cylindrical beds.
Results of the previous study [20] and this work suggest that the bed hydrodynamics, gas- solid distribution and bubble dynamics (size and rise velocity) in a semi-cylindrical fluidized bed is almost the same as those in a cylindrical fluidized bed. However, measuring bubble size and rise velocity in the semi-cylindrical bed is noticeably easier and more convenient than in a cylindrical bed. Therefore, the semi-cylindrical fluidized bed can be considered a very useful tool for being employed for investigating the hydrodynamics of fluidized beds instead of two dimensional or cylindrical fluidized beds.
Nomenclature
Ab
area occupied by the bubble (cm2)
AR
bubble aspect ratio (−)
dp
particle diameter (m)
dx
horizontal extreme of bubble (cm)
dy
vertical extreme of bubble (cm)
D
bed diameter (m)
Db
bubble size (measured by image analysis)
DB
bubble size (measured by fiber optic probe)
L
static bed height (m)
Le
effective distance between bundles (m)
tflg
bubble flight time (s)
Uc
transition velocity from bubbling to turbulent fluidization (m.s−1)
Ug
superficial gas velocity (m.s−1)
Umf
minimum fluidization velocity (m.s−1)
Vb
bubble rise velocity measured by fiber optic probe
VB
bubble rise velocity measured by image analysis
Greek symbols
ε
local bed voidage (−)
εm
minimum fluidization voidage (−)
τ
lag time (s)
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
