<title>Electrochemical studies on the redox behavior of zirconium in the LiF-NaF eutectic melt</title>
<author>  Liang Xu; Yanping Xiao; Qian Xu; Anthonie van Sandwijk; Zhuo Zhao; Qiushi Song; Yanqing Cai; Yongxiang Yang</author>
<Affiliation>School of Metallurgy, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110004, China；State Key Laboratory of Advanced Special Steel, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200072, China；School of Metallurgical Engineering, Anhui University of Technology, Ma'anshan 243002, China；Zr-Hf-Ti Metallurgie B.V., Den Haag 2582 SB, The Netherlands；Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Delft University of Technology, 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.jnucmat.2017.03.028</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311517302751</URL>
Highlights
The redox mechanism of zirconium in a fluoride salt system was investigated.
A multi-step redox process of Zr was found with various electrochemical methods.
Perspectives on zirconium electro-refining process were proposed.
Abstract
In the present paper, a detailed study of the redox behavior of zirconium in the eutectic LiF-NaF system was carried out on an inert molybdenum electrode at 750 °C. Several transient electrochemical methods were used such as cyclic voltammetry, square wave voltammetry, chronopotentiometry, and open circuit voltammetry. The reduction of Zr (IV) was found to follow a two-step mechanism of Zr (IV)/Zr (II) and Zr (II)/Zr at the potentials of about −1.10 and −1.50 V versus Pt, respectively. The theoretical evaluations of the number of transferred electrons according to both cyclic voltammetry and square wave voltammetry further confirmed the Zr reduction mechanism. The estimations of Zr (IV) diffusion coefficient in the LiF-NaF eutectic melt at 750 °C through cyclic voltammetry and chronopotentiometry are in fair agreement, as to be approximately 1.13E-5 and 2.42E-5 cm2/s, respectively.
Keywords：Zirconium electrochemical properties；Redox behaviorLiF-NaF
1. Introduction
Zirconium is an important material in nuclear industry for structural purposes and for holding the nuclear fuel because of its extremely low neutron-absorption cross-section and excellent corrosion-resistance properties, so that the thermal or slow neutrons are not absorbed during nuclear reactions by using zirconium as the fuel cladding material [1].
The zirconium cladding can be contaminated by the penetration of fission products and transuranic elements after long time use and could not meet the requirements of nuclear reactors [2]. During the head-end processing, Zr alloy scraps are generated after the disassembly and cutting procedures of the fuel rods which contain around 98% of zirconium and other alloying elements such as Sn, Fe, Cr and Nb [3]. Pyrometallurgical technology is considered to be a promising option for effectively treating and recycling Zr alloy scrap. The key step of the pyrometallurgical route is a molten salt electrorefining process which is effective to produce refractory metals and their alloys, and has been developed as a promising process for the recovery of highly pure metallic Zr from Zr alloy scrap [3], [4].
In order to enhance the efficiency and improve the reliability of the electrorefining process, the precise knowledge of the redox potentials of zirconium in the molten salt is required. The electrochemical behavior of zirconium in different molten salt systems has been investigated during deposition or electrorefining process. A number of investigations have been devoted to all-chloride salt mixtures such as LiCl-KCl-ZrCl4 [2], [3], [5], [6], [7], [8] and NaCl-ZrCl4 [9], and chloride-fluoride mixed systems like KCl-NaCl-ZrF4 [10], KCl-NaCl-K2ZrF6 [11], and LiCl-KCl-K2ZrF6 [12] in the temperature range from 450 to 820 °C. It was found that the reduction of Zr (IV) follows a multi-step mechanism in all-chloride molten salt systems caused by the formation of zirconium complexes including two soluble states of Zr (IV) and Zr (II), and insoluble states of Zr (I) and Zr. However, no consensus on the reduction and oxidation pathways between these states has been found, mainly due to different experimental conditions such as operating temperature, electrode material and zirconium ion concentration in the melt. Fluoride salt system is much less hygroscopic and volatile, allowing a more extensive operating window. Moreover, the deposited Zr metal is dendritic and coherent in all-fluoride molten salts which is more advantageous than in all-chloride baths producing mainly powdery Zr deposits [3]. For these reasons, a few studies have been carried out in all-fluoride salt systems such as LiF-NaF-KF-ZrF4 [13], LiF-NaF-KF-K2ZrF6 [14], LiF-CaF2-ZrF4 [15], and LiF-KF-ZrF4 [4]. It was found that Zr (IV) is reduced in one step exchanging four electrons in all-fluoride salt systems which differs from the observations in chloride-based systems. However, our present study in the LiF-NaF eutectic melt exhibits a multi-step reduction mechanism of Zr (IV) which closes to the findings in chloride salt systems. The disagreement over the zirconium electrochemical behavior in all-fluoride systems suggests that further investigations in molten fluoride melts are highly needed.
This paper presents a systematic electrochemical study on zirconium redox behavior in the eutectic LiF-NaF system on an inert molybdenum electrode at a constant temperature of 750 °C with different transient electrochemical techniques. K2ZrF6 was chosen as the zirconium ions source rather than ZrF4 due to its much lower price which could be beneficial for the future industrial-scale operation. Cyclic voltammetry, square wave voltammetry, chronopotentiometry, and open circuit voltammetry were employed to determine the typical redox potentials of zirconium, reversibility of the electrochemical reactions, rate-determining step as well as diffusion coefficients of zirconium ions in the melt. The present study is aiming to provide a better understanding of zirconium redox mechanisms in fluoride salt system particularly in a LiF-NaF eutectic melt to further optimize the zirconium electrorefining process from Zr alloy scraps.
2. Material and methods
The experimental apparatus used in this work is shown in Fig. 1. The three-electrode electrochemical cell was assembled in a high-density graphite crucible, which was placed within the constant temperature zone of a tubular stainless steel reactor and heated in an electric furnace. For all the experiments, the operation temperature was measured by a Chromel-Alumel thermocouple with an accuracy of ± 2 °C and kept constant at 750 °C with a proportional-integral-derivative (PID) thermal controller. The atmosphere was maintained to be inert with continuous high-purity argon gas circulation.
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the experimental set-up.
All the potentials in this study were measured with respect to a platinum wire (0.5 mm diameter, 99.99% purity) immersed in the molten bath, serving as a quasi-reference electrode Pt/PtOx/O2− [16]. A molybdenum rod (1 mm diameter, 99.95% purity) was used as the working electrode and a vitreous carbon rod (3 mm diameter) was employed as the counter electrode. The electrodes were first polished with abrasive papers to remove surface impurities and subsequently washed ultrasonically in distilled water and anhydrous ethanol before using.
All the chemical reagents employed in this study were of analytical grade. The mixture of LiF (99% purity) and NaF (≥99% purity) with eutectic composition (61:39 mol%) was served as supporting electrolyte, previously dehydrated at 300 °C for 48 h and pre-melted at 750 °C to remove residual moisture. The pre-melted salt mixture was melted again at 750 °C and zirconium ions were introduced into the molten melt in the form of K2ZrF6 powders (99% purity, 1 wt%) for the electrochemical measurements. The three electrodes were then inserted into the molten salt with an immersion area of 0.4788 cm2 for the Mo working electrode. The reference electrode was positioned nearby the working electrode without disturbing the current distribution between the working and counter electrodes. After 2 h immersion of the electrodes into the melt, the electrochemical measurements were carried out in order to guarantee a sufficient equilibrium between the molten salt and electrodes.
All the electrochemical experiments were conducted with the AUTOLAB/PGSTAT320 potentiostat from M/s. EcoChemie, the Netherlands, and the data acquisition was performed with GPES 4.9 software. The transient electrochemical techniques such as cyclic voltammetry, square wave voltammetry, chronopotentiometry, and open circuit voltammetry were employed to investigate the redox mechanisms of zirconium in the molten salt.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Cyclic voltammetries in the molten LiF-NaF with/without the presence of Zr ions
CV measurements were carried out on an inert Mo electrode to avoid the formation of any Zr alloys during the electrochemical reduction process of Zr (IV). A typical curve recorded in the blank LiF-NaF eutectic at 750 °C and 100 mVs−1 before the introduction of zirconium ions is given in Fig. 2 inset. The observed cathodic peak R0 at about −1.95 V vs. Pt and its corresponding anodic peak O0 are attributed to the deposition and dissolution of metal Na respectively [17]. The residual current in the potential range from −0.2 to −1.8 V vs. Pt is less than 10 mA and no redox peak was found within this range, indicating that the effects of background disturbances from the supporting electrolyte are negligible for cyclic voltammetry in the molten salt system.
Fig. 2. Cyclic voltammogram at 750 °C with the scan rate of 100 mVs−1. Inset: Cyclic voltammogram of the blank LiF-NaF eutectic melt. Working electrode: Mo (S = 0.4788 cm2), counter electrode: vitreous carbon, reference electrode: Pt.
In the presence of K2ZrF6 (1.0 wt%), the voltammogram was recorded at 750 °C with the scan rate of 100 mVs−1 and shown in Fig. 2. Two cathodic peaks are found in this CV curve at about −1.10 and −1.50 V vs. Pt respectively, indicating a multi-step reduction process of Zr (IV) in molten LiF-NaF, and three corresponding oxidation peaks of O1, O2 and O3 are observed at around −1.35, −0.95 and −0.70 V vs. Pt respectively. The redox peaks R2, O1, O2 and O3 are relatively sharp and readily to be identified, whereas the peak R1 is difficult to determine the peak potential which can be only projected by the slope change of the cyclic voltammogram. The presence of peak R1 will be further confirmed in the following paragraphs of this paper. It is interesting to note that in the literature [18], similar electrochemical study was performed in the LiF-NaF-ZrF4 system. A one step reduction process of Zr (IV) in LiF-NaF was reported, which is different from the observations in our present study. It may be due to the different experimental conditions such as operation temperature, electrode material (working/counter electrodes), zirconium ions source (ZrF4, K2ZrF6) and concentration in the melt.
3.2. Effect of scan range on peak behavior
As summarized in the Introduction, the reduction/oxidation of zirconium has been found to be a one-step process in all-fluoride molten salt systems like LiF-KF-ZrF4 [4] and LiF-CaF2-ZrF4 [15]. However, our current study presents a multi-step mechanism of Zr redox process in a molten LiF-NaF-K2ZrF6 mixture, which is similar to the findings in chloride-based molten salt systems [2], [3], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. In order to further identify the electrochemical reaction for each redox peak, cyclic voltammetry was performed at various potential ranges with a fixed scan rate of 100 mVs−1, as represented in Fig. 3. In addition to CV analysis, previous electrochemical results are combined to evaluate the redox reactions of zirconium.
Fig. 3. Cyclic voltammograms at 750 °C with the scan rate of 100 mVs−1 at varied scan ranges. Working electrode: Mo (S = 0.4788 cm2), counter electrode: vitreous carbon, reference electrode: Pt.
For the potential range between −0.40 and −1.00 V vs. Pt, no redox peak was observed indicating no electrochemical reaction occurred within this range. When the scan range is over −1.10 V vs. Pt, the cathodic peak R1 near −1.10 V vs. Pt is almost unnoticeable which can be identified by the slope change of the cyclic voltammograms. Its corresponding anodic peak O2 at around −0.95 V vs. Pt is evident when the potential sweeping back to positive side. This redox couple is well known as the soluble-soluble redox reactions between Zr (II) and Zr (IV) derived as the partial reactions represented in Eqs. (1) and (2) [2], [3], [6]. The redox reactions between the Zr ions at the oxidation states of + 2 and + 4 are expected to proceed slowly since the peak currents of the two redox peaks are very small. The low reaction rate is mainly due to the small exchange current density in Butler-Volmer kinetics [2].
@(1)
@(2)
Extending the potential range to −1.45 V vs. Pt, the reduction peak R2 and its corresponding oxidation peaks O1 and O3 begin to appear. The peaks become more and more identified and no more redox peaks are further observed as the expansion of the potential range to −1.8 V vs. Pt. Therefore, the final reduction peak R2 should be attributed to the formation of metallic zirconium on the Mo working electrode. The cathodic process associated with R2 is believed to be involved with the reduction reactions of Zr (II)/Zr and Zr (IV)/Zr because both Zr (II) and Zr (IV) exist in the melt at the potential of R2, as illustrated in Eqs. (3), (4). The anodic peaks O1 and O3 corresponded to the cathodic peak R2 should be associated with the oxidation process of metallic Zr, generating Zr (II) and Zr (IV) respectively, as represented in Eqs. (5), (6).
@(3)
@(4)
@(5)
@(6)
3.3. Effect of scan rate on peak behavior
Fig. 4 shows the cyclic voltammograms for a constant potential range between −0.40 and −1.80 V vs. Pt while changing the scan rate from 100 to 1500 mVs−1 with the step-size of 200 mVs−1. Within this potential range, the peaks O1, O2, O3 and R2 associated with Zr oxidation/reduction are well identified whereas the cathodic peak R1 is much less prominent, and the peak currents of the redox peaks generally intensified with the increase of the scan rate. Peak O1 is the dominant anodic peak within the scan rate range and shifted about 35 mV to the positive direction as the scan rate increased from 100 to 1500 mVs−1. The peaks O2 and O3 showed even smaller potential changes of approximately 5 and 15 mV respectively also to the positive side while raising the scan rate. Peak O2 became less conspicuous with the increasing scan rate due to the peak current of O1 intensified. Looking at the reduction process, the cathodic peak R2 moved to the negative direction with a potential change of around 65 mV when the scan rate increased from 100 to 1500 mVs−1.
Fig. 4. Cyclic voltammograms at 750 °C with the scan range between −0.40 and −1.80 V vs. Pt at varied scan rate from 100 to 1500 mVs−1. Working electrode: Mo (S = 0.4788 cm2), counter electrode: vitreous carbon, reference electrode: Pt.
The reversibility of the redox reaction at each peak was evaluated according to the relationship between peak potential and scan rate, as plotted in Fig. 5. The cathodic peak R1 was not analyzed due to the ambiguous peak shape. It is clear to see that the anodic peaks O1, O2 and O3 exhibited small potential changes of less than 40 mV, reflecting the reversibility of these reactions. The electrode process at peak R2 was also determined to be close to reversibility (quasi-reversibility), although it showed more significant peak potential change than the anodic reactions within the scan rate range from 100 to 1500 mVs−1. The peak currents of the redox peaks O1, O2, O3 and R2 were plotted versus the square root of scan rate in Fig. 6. A linear relationship is clearly evident, suggesting that these redox processes related to zirconium ions in the melt follow diffusion-controlled mass transfer.
Fig. 5. Dependence of peak potential on natural logarithm of scan rate from cyclic voltammograms.
Fig. 6. Dependence of peak current on square root of scan rate from cyclic voltammograms.
For a diffusion-controlled reversible electrochemical reaction system, the diffusion coefficient of zirconium ion is given by the Randles-Shevchik equation as follows [19].
@(7)
Where A is the surface area of the working electrode (cm2), n is the number of transferred electrons, D is the diffusion coefficient (cm2/s), C is the bulk molar concentration of Zr ions (mol/cm3), and v is the scan rate (V/s).
In the present study, the reduction peak R2 was utilized to predict the diffusion coefficient of zirconium ion as the height of peak R1 is difficult to be identified. The calculated results based on Eq. (7) are represented in Fig. 7. Since it is hard to determine the exact number of electrons involving the electrochemical process at peak R2 because of the combination of various reduction reactions, the diffusion coefficients were evaluated with the number of electrons varying from 1 to 4. The deviation shown in this figure is caused by the varied scan rates during the CV measurements. As metallic Zr was produced at peak R2, n = 4 was used to estimate the diffusion coefficient of Zr (IV) in the LiF-NaF eutectic melt at 750 °C. The result was turned out to be in the range from 8.14E-6 to 1.91E-5 cm2/s, resulting in an average value of 1.13E-5 cm2/s.
Fig. 7. Plots of calculated diffusion coefficient versus varied number of transferred electrons.
For an electrochemical reaction of reversibility, the number of transferred electrons during the electrode process can be evaluated via the following equation [20].
@(8)
Where  is the peak potential,  is the half-peak potential, R is a molar gas constant (8.314 J/mol·K), T is the temperature (K), n is the number of electrons, and F is a Faraday constant (96485 C/mol).
The number of transferred electrons associated with the reduction peak R2 was calculated by Eq. (8) at various scan rates. The results of the n value turn out to be 2.32, 2.23, 2.11, 2.09, 2.03, 2.01, and 1.97 for the scan rates of 100, 300, 500, 700, 900, 1100, 1300, and 1500 mVs−1 respectively. The slightly decreasing tendency of the calculated transferred electron values reflects the quasi-reversible nature of the reduction process at peak R2 [19]. The result shows a mean value of 2.11 for n, which is in consistence with the previous assumption that the cathodic process at R2 involves mainly the reduction of Zr (II) into metallic Zr, as described in Eq. (3).
3.4. Square wave voltammetry
Square wave voltammetry has been reported to be a more sensitive transient electrochemical method than cyclic voltammetry [21], [22]. Since the peak shape of R1 is ambiguous in cyclic voltammograms as discussed above, square wave voltammetry (SWV) was carried out to further investigate the reduction progress of Zr (IV) particularly to get a better understanding on the electrode process at the reduction peak R1. Fig. 8 shows the typical square wave voltammograms with the signal frequencies increasing from 20 to 50 Hz at 750 °C, scanning from −0.30 to −1.90 V vs. Pt. It is interesting to note that the two reduction peaks R2 and in particular R1 are clearly seen in the voltammograms, which are corresponded to the multi-step reduction mechanism of zirconium. The peak currents of R1 and R2 were found to be linearly dependent on the square root of the signal frequency, as represented in Fig. 9, suggesting that the cathodic electrode processes are of reversibility, as concluded above with cyclic voltammetry.
Fig. 8. Square wave voltammograms at 750 °C with the scan range between −0.30 and −1.90 V vs. Pt at varied frequencies from 20 to 50 Hz with a step potential of 1 mV. Working electrode: Mo (S = 0.4788 cm2), counter electrode: vitreous carbon, reference electrode: Pt.
Fig. 9. Dependence of peak current on square root of frequency from square wave voltammograms.
For a reversible electrochemical system, a mathematical analysis of the peak yields an equation which can associate the half-width of the peak (W1/2) and the number of exchanged electrons (n) [20], as illustrated in Eq. (9).
@(9)
As can be seen from Fig. 8, the peak shapes of R1 and R2 are not symmetrical in nature. The close position of the two peaks is likely to be a reason that the peak shapes could be affected by each other. In addition, particularly for peak R2, the distortion can be caused by also the currentless nucleation phase during the metallic Zr deposition on the Mo electrode [17], [23]. In the reference [17], the way of W1/2 measurement of an asymmetric peak has been described in detail for the number of transferred electrons evaluation according to Eq. (9). The calculated results at the frequencies of 20, 30, 40 and 50 Hz are 2.16, 2.08, 2.02 and 1.92 respectively for R1, and 2.36, 2.31, 2.27 and 2.26 respectively for R2. The average n value for R1 turns out to be 2.05, suggesting a two electron-transfer reduction of Zr (IV) into Zr (II), which agrees well with the prediction described in Eq. (1). The result for R2 delivers a mean value of 2.30, being also in fair agreement with the conclusions from the previous CV analysis.
3.5. Chronopotentiometry
Chronopotentiometry was carried out to further comprehend the reduction mechanism of Zr (IV). Fig. 10 presents the typical chronopotentiograms for a Mo electrode with various current densities at 750 °C. Each plot clearly exhibits two plateaus. The first plateau at about −1.50 V vs. Pt is associated with the metallic Zr formation, in the same potential range as indicated in cyclic and square wave voltammograms, and the second one is corresponded to the reduction of Na. The plateau for the cathodic reaction at approximately −1.10 V vs. Pt observed in SWVs is however not evidenced in the chronopotentiograms, which is similar to the observation in the CV measurements. It is also seen that the transient time decreased with the increase of the applied current on the electrode, confirming that the electrochemical reduction process is limited by the diffusion of zirconium ions in the melt. Therefore, the Sand's law valid for diffusion-controlled reactions can be utilized to evaluate the diffusion coefficients of zirconium ions in the molten salt, as represented in Eq. (10) [19].
@(10)
Fig. 10. Chronopotentiograms at 750 °C with varied applied currents from −40 to −100 mA. Working electrode: Mo (S = 0.4788 cm2), counter electrode: vitreous carbon, reference electrode: Pt.
The calculated diffusion coefficients of zirconium ions are plotted versus the number of exchanged electrons in Fig. 11. The deviation is due to the varied applied current densities on the Mo electrode. Since metallic Zr was formed at plateau of −1.50 V vs. Pt, the diffusion coefficient of Zr (IV) in the LiF-NaF eutectic melt at 750 °C was calculated according to n = 4, as to be between 1.46E-5 and 3.11E-5 cm2/s with a mean value of 2.42E-5 cm2/s, which is in good agreement with the result estimated from cyclic voltammetries. The diffusion coefficients obtained in the present study was also compared with some previously published results as shown in Table 1. Our results were in comparison with that in chloride-based systems since the data for molten fluorides can be hardly found from open literature.
Fig. 11. Plots of calculated diffusion coefficient versus varied number of transferred electrons.
Table 1. Comparison of diffusion coefficient of Zr (IV) obtained in this study with literature.
Based on the empirical formulations by Chen et al. [12], the diffusion coefficient of Zr (IV) was determined to be around 3.06E-6 cm2/s in a molten LiCl-KCl-K2ZrF6 system at 500 °C. The result reported by Yamada et al. [24] was 1.13E-5 cm2/s obtained through a capillary method. The diffusion coefficient of zirconium ion at the oxidation state of +4 in a molten LiCl-KCl-ZrCl4 mixture was estimated to be 7.77E-6, 1.63E-5, and 1.50E-5 cm2/s by Lee et al. [3], Park et al. [2], and Fabian et al. [25], respectively, based on cyclic voltammetry analysis. In general, the results obtained in this study by both cyclic voltammetry and chronopotentiometry accord closely with the reported data summarized above, mainly due to the similar temperature difference of about 100–150 °C between the melting point of the salt system and the operation temperature.
Fig. 12 shows the current reversal chronopotentiogram with the applied current of ±80 mA on the Mo electrode. A couple of redox plateaus are clearly evident and the anodic transient time was determined to be nearly equal to the cathodic one (Τox≈Τred≈1.8s). This result indicates an insoluble species formation on the electrode, confirming the previous conclusion that the cathodic reaction at about −1.50 V vs. Pt yields metallic Zr on the Mo working electrode.
Fig. 12. Current reversal chronopotentiograms at 750 °C with the applied current of ±80 mA. Working electrode: Mo (S = 0.4788 cm2), counter electrode: vitreous carbon, reference electrode: Pt.
3.6. Open circuit voltammetry
Open circuit voltammetry was also carried out to investigate the redox mechanism of zirconium by depositing a thin metal layer on the surface of the working electrode. The open-circuit potential of the electrode was recorded as a function of time after switching off the electrochemical control. Fig. 13 shows the open circuit voltammogram at 750 °C after electrodepositing at −2.0 V vs. Pt for 10 s on the Mo working electrode. The first plateau close to −1.80 V vs. Pt should be corresponding to the Na/Na+ equilibrium potential. The following plateaus at approximately −1.35, −0.90 and −0.70 V vs. Pt are related to the oxidation process of the deposited Zr metal on the electrode, associated with the Zr/Zr (II), Zr (II)/Zr (IV) and Zr/Zr (IV) couples, respectively. The result obtained by open circuit voltammetry is in consistence with the zirconium oxidation process concluded with the cyclic voltammetry analysis.
Fig. 13. Open circuit voltammogram at 750 °C after electrodepositing at −2.0 V vs. Pt for 10 s on the working electrode. Working electrode: Mo (S = 0.4788 cm2), counter electrode: vitreous carbon, reference electrode: Pt.
4. Conclusions
The electrochemical behavior of zirconium in the molten eutectic LiF-NaF containing 1 wt% K2ZrF6 was investigated at 750 °C on an inert molybdenum working electrode with several transient electrochemical techniques of cyclic voltammetry, square wave voltammetry, chronopotentiometry, and open circuit voltammetry. The reduction of Zr (IV) was found to be a two-step process that at the potentials of about −1.10 and −1.50 V versus Pt, the corresponding cathodic reactions of Zr (IV)/Zr (II) and Zr (II)/Zr occurred. The result was further confirmed by the theoretical calculations of the number of exchanged electrons based on the cyclic voltammetry and square wave voltammetry analysis. The diffusion coefficient of Zr (IV) in the LiF-NaF eutectic melt at 750 °C was estimated by cyclic voltammetry and chronopotentiometry, and the results appeared to be in good agreement, being about 1.13E-5 and 2.42E-5 cm2/s, respectively. The zirconium redox mechanism provided in this electrochemical study will be a theoretical reference for the future zirconium electrorefining from Zr alloy scraps in molten fluoride salt systems.
Acknowledgement
The authors acknowledge the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant No. 51274005 and 51174055. The authors thank Dr. Huijun Liu at Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) for his constructive discussions during this work.
