<title>A novel magnetic functionalized m-carboxyphenyl azo calix[4]arene symmetric sulfide derivative: synthesis and application as a selective adsorbent for removal of U (VI)</title>
<author> Jiaqi Luo; Yuli Xu; Qiqi Zhu; Kang Zhang; Fang Chen; Xiuwu Yu; Zhao Huang; Fangzhu Xiao; Guowen Peng</author>
<Affiliation>School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of South China, Hengyang, People’s Republic of China; School of Public Health, University of South China, Hengyang, People’s Republic of China; Hunan Province Engineering Technology Research Center of Uranium Tailings Treatment, University of South China, Hengyang, People’s Republic of China; Hunan Engineering Research Center for the Safety Control and Recycling of Radioactive Heavy Metal Pollutants, University of South China, Hengyang, People’s Republic of China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/S10967-020-07472-3</DOI>
<URL>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-020-07472-3?utm_source=cnki&utm_medium=affiliate&utm_content=meta&utm_campaign=DDCN_1_GL01_metadata</URL>
Abstract
A novel adsorbent magnetic functionalized m-carboxyphenyl azo calix[4]arene symmetrical sulfide derivative (Fe3O4/M-CCSSD) was fabricated by a series of simple reactions and characterized by FT-IR and SEM. The effects on U (VI) adsorption process were investigated at several conditions. The calculated data disclose that the adsorption process of U (VI) by Fe3O4/M-CCSSD is an endothermic spontaneous process, which well fits with the pseudo-second-order kinetic and Freundlich isotherm model. In the most favorable conditions, accounting for approximately 89% of U (VI) was removed. In addition, Fe3O4/M-CCSSD showed high selectivity for U (VI) and exceptional reusability.
Introduction
The presence of U (VI) in aquatic environment, derived from nuclear industrial, military, mining, agricultural fertilizer or natural deposition adversely affects human health and environmental safety [1, 2]. U (VI) is a heavy metal with both chemical toxicity and radiotoxicity [3]. There are multiple chemical forms in the natural environment, of which uranyl ions (UO22+) of high solubility and mobility are the most common [4]. Uranium is the most critical ingredient for the production of nuclear energy and known geological reserves of U (VI) (4.5 million tonnes) may last a century at current consumption rates [5]. Therefore, the removal and recovery of low-concentration uranium in uranium-containing radioactive wastewater has great practical and economic significance, which is beneficial to the environment security and effective utilization of resources [6].The traditional separation and enrichment methods of U (VI) mainly include chemical precipitation [7], extraction [8], adsorption [9], ion exchange [10], and biological treatment [11], etc. Compared with other treatment methods, the adsorption approach has a series of advantages, such as high feasibility, simple preparation, low consumption of reagents, convenient operation, good stability, renewable and so on [12]. It is widely used to deal with large volume, low concentration and complex composition of radioactive aqueous solution [13,14,15]. Adsorption treatment of uranium-containing radioactive wastewater usually adopts solid adsorbents, so that one or more different elements contained in uranium-containing radioactive wastewater are adsorbed on its surface to achieve the purpose of separating U (VI) [16]. However, in the actual application process, there are still deficiencies such as low selective adsorption capacity and affinity of the adsorbents for U (VI), difficulty in separation treatment after adsorption and poor stability of the adsorbents in uranium-containing radioactive wastewater. Herein, there has been great attention to develop effective and selective adsorbents for separating and recovering U (VI) from uranium-containing radioactive wastewater.
So far, researchers are committed to hunting for excellent adsorbents with high adsorption capacity and affinity of U (VI), such as metal organic frameworks (MOFs) [17], nanofibrous adsorbent [18], inorganic nanomaterials [19], carbon-based materials [20], traditional resin [21] and metal layered double hydroxides [22], e.g. Wang et al. [23] found that amidoxime-based carbon nanotubes has superior adsorption properties for uranium in a multi-ion environment. But its selective adsorption of U (VI) is not ideal and its particle size is too small, which is easy to lose during the adsorption process. Shen et al. [24] grafted polyvinylimidazole amidoxim on the surface of MoS2 sheet by covalent bonds. Although it has the advantages of fast adsorption rate and simple preparation, it is easy to form complex ions with other ions and has low selective adsorption of U (VI). Therefore, there is an urgent need to choose a new type of adsorbent to treat low-concentration uranium-containing wastewater with marvelous selectivity and high uranium recognition rate. Calixarenes are a class of cavity-shaped cyclic molecules based on the basic structural units of phenol linked via alkylidene groups. It has latent potential to be counted as the third generation of supramolecules, after cyclodextrins and crown ethers [25]. Calixarenes possess many outstanding characteristics: (1) unique adsorption properties, (2) adjustability of aperture and structure, (3) easy modification of functional groups on its upper and lower rim, (4) high stability on aqueous solution, (5) low toxicity [26]. These features provide a possibility for calixarenes as a solid adsorbent to apply in the fields of the remediation and recovery of U (VI) from uranium-containing radioactive wastewater. There are still some inevitable deficiences on calixarene in actual application. The key to the effective enrichment and separation of U (VI) by calixarene is to make it capable of selectively coordinating with U (VI). To make calixarene suitable for adsorption application, various calixarene derivatives functionalized with different active groups have been developed. Pu et al. [27] synthesized a calixarene sulfide derivative to extract U (VI) from aqueous solution. Therefore, to design and choose selective ligands, the nitrogen- and sulfur-containing functional groups arouse widespread attention. Bitter et al. [28] introduced three kinds of atoms of O, N, S into the lower rim of the calixarene to synthesize a new type of calixarene heteroatom crown ether derivative. However, it is still a challenge to separate the adsorbents from the aqueous solution after adsorption due to the small size of the adsorbent particles and the large volume of uranium-containing radioactive wastewater in practical applications. Magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles are suited to separating and recycling of heavy metal wastewater due to their excellent paramagnetic properties and good biocompatibility [29]. Surface physical or chemical modification of the magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles was adopted by researchers, so that the surface of the magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles contain different functional groups to achieve multi-functionalization [30, 31]. To avoid secondary comtamination, the modified magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles and calixarene derivatives can be combinated, which makes the adsorbent easy to separate from the aqueous solution after adsorption while possessing a good affinity and selectivity for U (VI).
This work aims at fabricating a noval and effective adsorbent, magnetic Fe3O4/M-CCSSD, for the removal of low concentration U (VI) from aquatic environment. Considering the spatial coordination configuration of uranyl ions, the heteroatom-containing groups were modified to the lower rim of calix[4]arene, and the active groups were derived at the upper rim of calix[4]arene. Then the upper rim of calix[4]arene was grafted onto aminated magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles. In this way, magnetic heterocalixarene functional materials with stable three-dimensional conformation and matching spatial coordination configuration are synthesized. The as-prepared Fe3O4/M-CCSSD adsorbent was structurally characterized. Moreover, the adsorption performances of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composite to U (VI) from aqueous solution were also explored through a series of batch adsorption experiments and provided theoretical and experimental basis for the remediation of uranium-containing radioactive wastewater.
Experimental
Reagents
P-tert-butyl phenol (99%), chemical grade, was obtained from Aladdin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd., China. M-aminobenzoic acid of analytical grade was purchased from Tianjin Kemeiou Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., China. A stock solution of U(VI) (1.000 g/L) was prepared by dissolving 2.1092 g of UO2(NO3)2·6H2O (99.9%) in 1.0 L of deionized water, which was provided by the Key Discipline Laboratory for National Defence for Biotechnology in Uranium Mining and Hydrometallurgy, University of South China. Other chemical reagents used in this work were of analytical grade, which purchased from Tianjin Damao Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd., China and were used without further purification.
Apparatus
UV–Vis 8500 (Shanghai Tianmei Scientific Instruments Co., Ltd.) was used to determine the concentration of uranyl ion in aqueous solution. PHS-3C precision pH meter (Shanghai Leiqi Instrument Factory) was used for measuring the pH of the aqueous solutions. ICP-OES (PerkinElmer, America) was used to inspected the concentration of other tested ions in supernatant. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (IR Prestige-21, Shimadzu, Japan) was used for qualitative analysis of as-prepared adsorbents.
Synthesis of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD
The preparation process of the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD is described as follows.
Firstly, p-tert-butyl calix[4]arene was synthesized according to the previous work in the Ref. [32] and calix[4]arene was fabricated according to a literature method [33], respectively. M-aminobenzene carboxydiazo salt was prepared in line with the methods in Ref. [34].
Secondly, the synthesis of m-carboxyphenyl azo calix[4]arene was preformed according to the process in the Ref. [35]. Calix[4]arene powder (1.2 g) was weighed and put in 100 mL beaker with 53 mL of N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF) under ice bath conditions. Aqueous solution of M-aminobenzene carboxydiazo salt (0.32 mol L−1, 15 mL) was slowly added dropwise to the DMF solution mixed with calix[4]arene under constant stirring. 25% sodium acetate solution was used to adjusted the pH of the above mixed solution to 6–7. Then, the mixed solution gradually changed from brick red to big red with lots of bubbles. After reacting in an ice-water bath for 1.5 h, the pH of the mixed solution was adjusted below 1 with concentrated hydrochloric acid. The mixed solution was left overnight at room temperature before filtering and drying. Afterward, a dark red solid crude product was formed and collected. The yield was 86%. Then, the dark red solid crude product was dissolved in 50 mL sodium bicarbonate solution. 1 g of activated carbon was added to the aqueous solution. Hereafter, the mixed solution was heated to 60 °C and was kept stirring. The resultant was collected by vacuum filtration and then acidified with concentrated hydrochloric acid. The mixture was filtered and the the wet filtered substance was dried in a vacuum oven overnight, And the dark red solid was denoted as m-carboxyphenyl azo calix[4]arene (product a). The yield was 77%.
Subsequently, according to the Ref. [27], m-carboxyphenyl azo calix[4]arene symmetrical sulfide derivative was fabricated. 1.8 g product a and 1 g anhydrous K2CO3 were put in 100 mL single-necked round bottom flask with mixed solution of 3 mL 1,3-dibromopropane (98%) and 38 mL CH3CN. Under the protection of N2, the mixture was heated to 70 °C and refluxed with vigorous magnetic stirring for 48 h. After the reaction, the mixture was cooled to room temperature before rotating and evaporating in vacuum to a small amount of residual solvent and solid residue. 40 mL of dilute hydrochloric acid and CHCl3 (50/50, v/v) was put in the residue. The mixed solution was washed to neutral with deionized water, extracted and separated of organic phase, filtered after drying with anhydrous MgSO4. Then, 20 mL methanol was added to the organic phase and m-carboxyphenyl azo calix[4]arene bromoethyl ether derivative (product b) was got after stewing. The yield was 68.5%.
1.2 g product b, 1.45 g tetrabutylammonium iodide and 0.48 g Na2S·9H2O were put in 100 mL single-necked round bottom flask with mixed solution of 10 mL distilled water and 25 mL absolute ethanol. The mixture was heated to 70 °C and refluxed with constant stirring under the protection of nitrogen. After 12 h of the reaction, the mixture was cooled to room temperature and then evaporated with a rotary evaporator. After the organic phase washed with saturated NaCl solution until neutral, the residual NaCl was washed with distilled water. The organic phase was dried over anhydrous MgSO4 and then filtered, and 20 mL of methanol was added for further purification. The m-carboxyphenyl azo calix[4]arene symmetrical sulfide derivative (product c) was obtained after resting residue. The yield was 69.3%.
Finally, in light of the previous methods in Ref. [36], Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was prepared. Here, the amino surface functionalized magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles was placed in the mixed aqueous solution of 80 mL of ethanol and 20 mL of distilled water, followed by ultrasonic dispersion for 30 min. Then 5 mL of 25% ammonia was poured into the reaction system, and the product c was added with continuous mechanical stirring at room temperature. After 6 h of the reaction, the remains was separated with a magnet and then washed with distilled water and ethanol respectively until the precipitate was neutral. Afterward, the final product (Fe3O4/M-CCSSD) was collected with a permanent magnet after drying in a vacuum oven overnight at 60 °C (Scheme 1).
The synthetic route of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Uranium adsorption experiments
A series of batch sorption experiments were carried out to assess the adsorption behavior of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD on selective removal of U(VI) in different conditions, such as the effect of pH, adsorbent dosage, initial U(VI) concentration, competing metal cation ions, contact time and temperature. And the related adsorption mechanism was also investigated.
8 mg of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD adsorbent was added into a series of 100 mL conical flasks along with stoppers containing either 20 mg L−1 of 40 mL uranium standard solution or multi-ion test solution, and 0.05 M HCl or 0.05 M NaOH solution were used to adjust the pH value to 5 of the reaction system. The conical flask was placed at room temperatures and reacted at constant shaken of 250 rpm min−1 for 4 h in a horizontal air bath shaker. After reaction, the conical flask was taken out and the supernatant was separated from the solid by centrifuging at 10,000 rpm min−1 for 10 min. And the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD adsorbent was separated with a permanent magnet. 1 mL of supernatant was taken into a 10 mL colorimetric tube and then 1 mL 0.05% azoarsenic III was added. An acetic acidsodium acetate buffer solution (pH = 4) was used to volume to scale. Then, the aqueous solution was mixed upside and down before standing for 10 min. The UV–Vis spectrophotometer was employed to detecte the absorbance of U (VI) of the supernatant liquid at wavelength of 652 nm [37]. According to the standard curve equation of uranium solution, the concentration of U (VI) in the supernatant can be calculated from the absorbance value. Each set of adsorption tests was performed triplicate in parallel to reduce accidental errors and the average values were used for calculation.
The adsorption amount q (mg g−1), the adsorption rate E (%) and the distribution coefficient Kd (mL g−1) were calculated according to the following formulas [24].
q=c0−cem×V
(1)
E=c0−cec0×100%
(2)
Kd=qece
(3)
where q (mg g−1) stands for the adsorption amount; E (%) represents the adsorption rate; C0 (mg L−1) shows the mass concentration of uranium before adsorption; Ce (mg L−1) is expressed equilibrium concentrations of U(VI); m (g) means the mass of adsorbent and V (L) denotes the volume of testing solution.
Reusability experiment
The adsorbent recyclability and regeneration are often considered as a necessity for economic viability and long-term cost-effectiveness. In order to investigated the practical reusability of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD adsorbent and to determine an effective eluent, the consecutive adsorption–desorption experiments were conducted for six cycles with the same concentration of sorbent (0.5 mg/mL). 0.01 M HNO3 and NaOH solution were used as eluents. The Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composite was separated from the solution by applying an external magnet after the U(VI) adsorption reaches equilibrium. The obtained Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was dissolved in the eluent agents and then the mixture was shaken at room temperature and 250 rpm min−1 for 240 min followed by magnetic separation and deionized water rinsing for three times, respectively. Finally, it requires to be dried at 50 °C in a vacuum oven overnight for reuse. Then the regenerated Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was applied in the recycle adsorption study. The concentration of U(VI) was determined by UV–Vis spectrophotometry (λ = 652 nm). In order to reduce the relative error, all the above experiments are in triplicate and the experimental data are averaged.
Results and discussions
Characterizations
The structural properties and morphology of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD were identified by FT-IR, SEM and 1H-NMR spectrum analysis in detail.
1.
FT-IR analysis
FT-IR spectrum was picked to verify the chemical composition of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD samples before and after uranium adsorption, which was shown in Fig. 1. For Fe3O4/M-CCSSD, these typical absorption peaks have been reported in previous work [38].
The FT-IR spectrum of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD shows the absorption peak at wavenumbers of 3197 cm−1, which belongs to the stretching modes of O–H bond of phenolic hydroxyl group. The stretching frequency appearing at 2956 cm−1 is representative of the C–H bond of saturated alkyl group (–CH3, –CH2–). The two bands at 1715 cm−1 and 1594 cm−1 are designated as the stretching vibration peak of the –C=O and –N=N– bonds, respectively. The peak at 1386 cm−1 is attributed to bending vibration peak of –C–H bond of tert-butyl group. It can be observed that the peak of –C–O bond of phenolic hydroxyl group emerges at 1247 cm−1. Fe3O4/M-CCSSD exhibits characteristic absorptions bands at 1091 cm−1 of vibration absorption peak of –C–S– bond and 576 cm−1 of Fe–O bond, which thus confirms grafting of sulfide and Fe3O4 onto the M-CCSSD. The FT-IR spectra of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD before and after adsorption of uranium do not show detectable change.
2.
SEM analysis
The morphology of the as-synthesized Fe3O4/M-CCSSD samples was detected by SEM images (Fig. 2), which showed the microcosmic patterns of the as-prepared Fe3O4/M-CCSSD. The images displayed in Fig. 2 can be clearly found that the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD looks like small irregular shape particles with a diameter distribution in the range of 100–400 nm and its surface is rough. The specific surface area of the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD increases because of the uneven surface, which is beneficial to the adsorption process.
3.
1H-NMR spectrum analysis
The 1H-NMR spectrum of M-CCSSD is shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen from Fig. 3 that the chemical shift(δ) of the hydrogen on the methylene group is at 1.0148–1.6898 ppm, and the ArH(δ) is at 7.2627 ppm.
Abovementioned results demonstrate that the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composite is prepared successfully and contains both coordinating atoms nitrogen and sulfur functional groups.
Sorption behavior of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD toward U (VI)
1.
Effect of pH on U (VI) adsorption and mechanism
We further assessed the performance of the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composites adsorption for uranium. The pH of the uranium aqueous solution is one of the significant determining factors that influences the chemical properties of uranyl ions and the performance of adsorbent.
A series of 40 mL uranium standard solution with a mass concentration of 20 mg L−1 were taken into 100 mL of conical flasks with different pH values ranging from 2.0 to 8.0. 8 mg of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was added to the solution at 25 °C. The reaction was carried out for 4 h, and the effect of pH value on the enrichment of uranium was observed in Fig. 4 . It can be clearly seen that the uranium adsorption rate of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was strongly affected by the pH value of the uranium solution.
There were many complex forms of U (VI) in solution. As can be observed in Fig. 4, when the pH values varied from 2.0 to 5.0, the U (VI) adsorption rate increased drastically with the increase of pH values. At lower pH values, the main form of U (VI) was UO22+ species. At this time, a large amount of H+ and UO22+ in the solution competed for nucleophilic sites on the surface of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composites, causing protonation of the nucleophilic sites and a reduction of the active binding sites available for the adsorption of UO22+ ions. However, with an increse of pH value, H+ in the solution decreased and the nucleophilic sites on the surface of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD progressively deprotonated. Therefore, UO22+ adsorption efficiency had an significant increase as pH changed from 2.0 to 5.0. But with the further increase of pH from 5.0 to 8.0, the larger complex species (UO2)3(OH)5+, (UO2)4(OH)7+, (UO2)3(OH) −7, UO2(OH) −3 and UO2(OH) 2−4 of U (VI) will appear [8], and the contents of these multimers will also increase with increasing pH value [39]. Due to the hydrolysis of U (VI) at higher pH, the spatial structure of U (VI) increased, hindering the combination of U (VI) and the active coordinating sites, resulting in a slightly decrease in the adsorption rate of U (VI) [15].
The results suggest that the U (VI) adsoption process was predominantly related to the types of UO22+ species present at different pH conditions, and the maximum U (VI) adsorption rate of 89% was achieved at the point of pH 5.0. At this moment, Fe3O4/M-CCSSD exhibited a satisfactory adsorption performance.
2.
Effect of adsorbent dosage
A series of 40 mL uranium standard solution with a mass concentration of 20 mg L−1 were taken and the pH of uranium standard solution was adjusted to 5. Then, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14 mg Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composites were added into uranium standard solution, respectively. The reaction was performed at 25 °C for 4 h, and the effect of the amount of adsorbent on the adsorption of U(VI) was observed (Fig. 5).
It can be clearly found from Fig. 5 that as the dose of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD sorbent increased, the uranium adsorption rate gradually increased. This was reasonably due to the increase in active sites and specific surface area. When the dosage of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was 8 mg, the adsorption rate exceeded 88%. However, as the dosage of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD continually increased, the increase in adsorption rate was not significant. Therefore, the optimal dosage of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD on the adsorption of U(VI) was 8 mg.
3.
Selective sorption of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD towards U(VI)
Considering the complexity of radioactive uranium-containing wastewater components in the real environment, the capability of selective sorption of U(VI) by Fe3O4/M-CCSSD in the presence of various interfering ions containing Na+, Mg2+, Sr2+, Pb2+, Ca2+, Cr3+, Fe3+ and Zn2+ in the form of nitrate was further investigated by using batch sorption experiments (Fig. 6). The results showed that in the presence of various other metal ions, the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD still had a favorable adsorption selectivity and removal efficiency for U(VI). For uranium, the selectivety can be observed at least 80% with the presence of Pb2+ ion and the maximum U(VI) removal rate can reach up to unprecedented 96% with the presence of Fe3+ ion. The fact indicated that other co-existing metal cation ions do not cause obvious interference with sorption of U(VI) by Fe3O4/M-CCSSD under current experimental conditions and Fe3O4/M-CCSSD may be a potentially selective U(VI) adsorbent.
4.
Effect of contact time and adsorption kinetics of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD
Keeping other factors constant, the experiment of effect of contact time (t = 10, 30, 60, 120, 180, 240, 270, 300 min) on the adsorption of uranium by Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was carried out. The adsorption equilibrium curve is shown in Fig. 7.
It can be obviously observed in Fig. 7 that the adsorption process can be divided into two processes: a fairly fast adsorption of U(VI) during the first 120 min, and followed by a slow uptake period until the adsorption equilibrium was reached at 240 min. This may be due to the large number of nucleophilic sites on the surface of the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composites in the initial adsorption process towards U(VI). As the reaction goes on, the active coordinating sites on the surface of the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was gradually saturated, and the uranium adsorption process gradually slowed down until the adsorption was equilibrated in 240 min. 89% of U(VI) was separated from 40 mL of uranium standard solution with the concentration of 20 mg L−1 by 8 mg Fe3O4/M-CCSSD adsorbent in 240 min.
Adsorption kinetics was crucial for evaluating U(VI) adsorption behavior and mechanism. The adsorption kinetics of uranium on the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was also discussed. All results were linearly fitted by two different kinetic models, namely pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models, which were applied to describe the physical adsorption and chemical adsorption processes, respectively. The relevant fitting results were shown in Fig. 8. And the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic non-linear equations were as follows [40].
The pseudo-first-order kinetic equation is:
qt=qe(1−e−k1t)
(4)
The pseudo-second-order kinetic equation is:
qt=q2ek2t1+qek2t
(5)
where k1 (h−1) and k2 (g mg−1 h−1) are the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic adsorption rate constant, respectively; qe (mg g−1) and qt (mg g−1) represent adsorption capacity at equilibrium and contact times (t), respectively.
The kinetic parameters are listed in Table 1. It can be seen from Table 1 that the calculated value of correlation coefficient of pseudo-second-order kinetic model (R2= 0.9993) is higher than that of pseudo-first-order kinetic model (R2= 0.9542). The equilibrium adsorption amount of the experimental data (about 88.57 mg g−1) is close to the theoretical value 90.78 mg g−1 calculated by the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. It is reasonable to conclude that the pseudo-second-order kinetic model with correlation coefficients closer to 1 is more suitable for describing the adsorption kinetic of uranium on the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD, and the adsorption of U(VI) by the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD is dominated by chemical adsorption process.
5.
Effect of initial uranium concentration and adsorption isotherms of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD
Initial uranium concentrations, ranging from 2 to 50 mg L−1, were applied for determining the U(VI) adsorption behavior of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD (Fig. 9). It was clear that as the initial concentration of uranium in the solution increased, the adsorption rate of uranium by Fe3O4/M-CCSSD adsorbent showed a downward trend. This was due to the limited nucleophilic active sites on the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composites when the same quality Fe3O4/M-CCSSD adsorbent was added. As the initial concentration of uranium increased, more uranium was adsorbed on the surface of the adsorbent, resulting in the active binding sites on the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD adsorbent being gradually occupied until it reached saturation, and no more uranium can be adsorbed. As the total amount of uranium increased, the adsorption rate of uranium gradually brought down. Therefore, we chose the initial uranium concentration of 20 mg L−1.
Subsequently, to evaluate the maximum adsorption capacity of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD towards U(VI), Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were employed to examine the experimental data with various conditions (Fig. 10). The Langmuir isotherm model assumes that the monolayer adsorption occurs on the homogeneous surface of the adsorbent, which reflects that the adsorption sites on the surface of the adsorbent are evenly distributed and have the consistent affinity for U(VI). It belongs to the monolayer adsorption model and also reveals the chemical adsorption characteristics. The Freundlich equation is considered that multilayer adsorption occurs on the heterogeneous surface of the adsorbent.
Langmuir adsorption isotherm model [41]:
1qe=1qmax+1qmaxceb
(6)
Freundlich adsorption isotherm model [41]:
logqe=1nlogce+logk
(7)
where qmax (mg g−1) denotes single-layer saturated adsorption capacity; Ce (mg L−1) represents equilibrium concentrations of U(VI); b (L mg−1) is expressed Langmuir adsorption constant; k (mg g−1) stands for Freundlich adsorption constant; n is the Freundlich constant showing adsorption intensity.
The isotherms parameters are given in Table 2. It can be observed from Table 2 that the correlation coefficient of Freundlich isotherms model (R2= 0.99267) is similar to that of Langmuir isotherms model (R2= 0.98276), revealing that monolayer adsorption and multilayer adsorption of U(VI) occur simultaneously on the surface of the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD. The n value of Freundlich model is an index for heterogeneity of the surface, which shows adsorption intensity, and a higher n value indicates a heterogeneous surface with a wide adsorption sites distribution.
6.
Effect of temperature and thermodynamic analysis of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD
In order to evaluate the influence of temperature on the adsorption of U(VI) onto Fe3O4/M-CCSSD, with other conditions being equal, adsorption experiments covering different reaction temperatures in the range of 10–35 °C were performed. The curve in Fig. 11 showed that the adsorption rate of U(VI) increased with the increase of temperature gradually before the adsorption reaction reaches equilibrium. The increase in the adsorption rate may be due to the disorder degree in the reaction system increased with the temperature elevated, resulting in an increase in the collision probability of the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD and U(VI). The result suggested that the increase of temperature was beneficial to the adsorption of U(VI) on the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composite.
Based on the effect of temperature on U(VI) adsorption, the thermodynamics of U(VI) adsorption by Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was studied to evaluate the nature of adsorption process of U(VI) on the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD. The thermodynamic parameters of U(VI) adsorption on the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD including Gibbs free energy change ΔGθ, standard enthalpy change ΔHθ and standard entropy change ΔSθ can be calculated using the following formulas [36].
ΔGθ=ΔHθ−TΔSθ
(8)
ΔGθ=−RTlnKd
(9)
The Van’t Hoff equation [36] is as follows:
lnKd=−ΔHθRT+ΔSθR
(10)
where Kd (mL g−1) is expressed distribution coefficient; T (K) represents Kelvin temperature; R shows the universal gas constant (8.314 J mol−1 K−1). The relationship diagram of lnKd ~ 1/T is shown in Fig. 11, and the corresponding results are shown in Table 3, respectively.
ΔHθ and ΔSθ were calculated from the slope and intercept of the linear equation of lnKd versus 1/T. ΔGθ was negative, indicating that the adsoption process of U(VI) by Fe3O4/M-CCSSD conforms to the spontaneous trend. And as the temperature increased, the more negative the ΔGθ value was, the more favorable it was for the adsorption reaction of U(VI). ΔHθ was expressed a positive value, suggesting that adsorption process of U(VI) by Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was an endothermic process, which was consistent with the increase of U(VI) adsorption efficiency with the increase of temperature.ΔSθ was also positive, demonstrating that the degree of disorder and the randomness of U(VI) contacting with the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD increased during the adsorption process (Fig. 12).
7.
Reusability analysis of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD
Regenerability is important for an effective and economical sorbent. Therefore, the desorption and regeneration performance of the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was studied. The desorption experiment was carried out with HNO3 and NaOH as eluents. As shown in Fig. 13, elution with HNO3 solution can better maintain the adsorption percentage of U(VI) than NaOH. After the sixth cycle, the recycled Fe3O4/M-CCSSD adsorbent exhibits a gradual decrease of the adsorption percentage of U(VI). The decrease of adsorption percentage may mainly result from the mass loss of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD during multiple adsorption, elution and rinsing processes, and partly because small portion active sites of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD were deactivated. Besides, as the cycle goes on, more and more residual uranyl ions occupy the active binding sites, which may also cause the decrease of adsorption percentage. Even so, it can be observed that the sorption percentage of U(VI) by Fe3O4/M-CCSSD treated with HNO3 and NaOH solution remains beyond 70% and 60% after six cycles with only a slight decrease per cycle, respectively. The results indicate the exceptional recyclability and reusability of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD for U(VI) sorption, which is significant for the reduction of cost in practical uranium recovery applications.
8.
Comparison of adsorption capacity of different adsorbents towards U(VI)
To underscore the importance of the obtained results, it is instructive to briefly summarize the previous work on adsorbent development for the recovery of uranyl from aqueous environment. The majority of studies in this area were mostly focused on the extraction of uranium from the low-concentration uranium-containing aqueous solutions. And the ligand grafting techniques helped increase the overall adsorption capacity for U(VI) (Table 4).
Conclusions
As above mentioned, N- and S-containing functional groups and Fe3O4 nanoparticles were introduced to design and prepare a noval magnetic adsorbent Fe3O4/M-CCSSD. Fe3O4/M-CCSSD sample was characterized by FT-IR and SEM, which proved that Fe3O4/M-CCSSD was successfully synthesized and used for the separation and enrichment of U(VI) in the low-concentration uranium-containing aqueous solutions.
The results of batch sorption experiments evidence that when the pH value is 5.0, the initial concentration of uranium is 20 mg L−1, the temperature is 25 °C, the contact time is 4 h, and the amount of adsorbent is 8 mg, the adsorption efficiency of U(VI) by Fe3O4/M-CCSSD can reach 89%. Fe3O4/M-CCSSD not only exhibits extraordinary adsorption performance for U(VI), but also has highly selective sorption towards U(VI) with excellent selectivity of more than 80% at the presence of other co-existing metal cation ions. And its easy separation and rapid retrieval of the fabricated Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composite from the reaction system assigned to the great magnetic properties.
The thermodynamic research results disclose that the adsorption of Fe3O4/M-CCSSD towards U(VI) is a spontaneous entropy-increasing endothermic reaction, and monolayer adsorption and multilayer adsorption of U(VI) occur simultaneously on the surface of the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD composites, which is consistent with the characteristics of chemisorption.
In general, because of high adsorption efficiency, effortless performance, high selectivity to U(VI) and advantageous magnetic property, the Fe3O4/M-CCSSD adsorbent has extensive implementation prospect for remediation of U(VI) in aquatic environment.
