<title>Extraction kinetics of ruthenium in the mixture of tri- n -butyl phosphate and n -dodecane</title>
<author>S. Ramakrishna Reddy; Rahul Trikha; Remya Murali; Elizabeth Augustine; N. Desigan; Niranjan K. Pandey; C. Mallika; U. Kamachi Mudali; J.B. Joshi</author>
<Affiliation>Reprocessing Group, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam, TN, 603102, India；Homi Bhabha National Institute, Anushaktinagar, Mumbai, 400 094, India</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.10.003</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197015300834</URL>
Highlights
A comprehensive model is developed to describe the extraction kinetics of Ru in TBP.
Rate–constant and mass transfer coefficient determined experimentally and their correlation derived.
Extraction of Ru into TBP-dodecane mixture is an interfacial reaction.
Overall extraction kinetics is both kinetic and diffusion controlled.
Short residence time contactor may improve decontamination of U and Pu from Ru.
Abstract
The extraction kinetics of ruthenium in the mixture of tri-n-butyl phosphate and n-dodecane has been investigated experimentally, using a constant interfacial area stirred cell. Effect of stirring speed, temperature, specific interfacial area and concentrations of reactant and nitric acid on the extraction rate of ruthenium were studied to identify the reaction location, extraction reaction regime and also to determine the intrinsic rate constant of the reaction and mass transfer coefficients. A systematic approach was adopted for the determination of rate parameters. Based on experimental results it is concluded that the reaction with the extractant takes place at interface and the overall rate is controlled by both the intrinsic kinetics and the mass transfer of the species involved.
Keywords：Ruthenium extraction；Constant interfacial area stirred cell；Kinetics；Mass transfer；PUREX process
1. Introduction
Reprocessing of spent nuclear fuels is indispensable for the economic use of uranium in nuclear energy production and has been used industrially for more than five decades. Aqueous reprocessing involves the use of an extractant for the separation of the reusable actinides from the fission products. The most widely used PUREX process (Musikas et al., 2004) employs tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) as the extractant. There are many variations of the PUREX separation process. In the most common version, uranium and plutonium are co-extracted into organic solvent in the first extraction cycle, while most of the fission products remain in the aqueous phase (raffinate). However, the extraction behavior of two fission product elements, zirconium and ruthenium, makes it difficult to get satisfactory decontamination of products in the reprocessing of irradiated fuel by the PUREX process. These elements get extracted with uranium and plutonium products in unacceptable levels.
The fission yield of ruthenium during the fission of uranium and plutonium is about 5%. Around 20% of the total activity is due to 106Ru in a typical 28% Pu containing MOX fuel discharged from Fast Breeder Reactors (FBRs) with an average burn up of around 81 GWd/t and cooled for six months (Natarajan 2013). As the half-life of 106Ru is about a year, the decontamination factors (DF) required for ruthenium is high even for fuels with around 2-years cooling. The inability to effect a complete separation of uranium and plutonium from ruthenium is due to the variety of ruthenium compounds/complexes present in nitric acid medium, with different extraction behavior. Ruthenium belongs to the platinum group metals and shows a number of valence states, from 8+ as in RuO4 to zero. The principal valence most relevant to the PUREX process are 2+ and 3+ and IV as Ru3+ (Siczek and Steindler, 1978). A special peculiarity of ruthenium is the formation of extraordinarily stable species, ruthenium nitrosyl (RuNO)3+, and large number of nitrosyl complexes. During the dissolution of irradiated nuclear fuel in nitric acid, ruthenium mainly passes into solution in the form of various nitrato, nitro and mixed nitrato–nitro complexes of trivalent ruthenium nitrosyls (RuNO)3+(Prescott and Sharp, 1970). Most of the aqueous Ru(IV) produced during the dissolution of the spent fuel gets quickly converted to Ru(II) and Ru(III). The distribution coefficients of nitrosyl ruthenium and its nitrato and nitro complexes depend upon the concentration of nitric acid, nitrate ion, nitrous acid, temperature and concentration of TBP.
The present design of commercial extraction equipment in operation such as mixer-settler, pulsed column and annular centrifugal extractor in spent fuel reprocessing is based on the number of equilibrium stages required to effect a given separation. This is not an optimal design as it is based only on equilibrium isotherms neglecting the kinetic effects. The equilibrium process gives no guidance as to the overall rate of the mass transfer process from one phase to the other, a factor which is of key importance in determining the design and performance of continuous industrial solvent extraction units. Hence, for the rational design and operation of extraction equipment, one should know the mass transfer characteristics, intrinsic kinetics and the extent of axial mixing. Kinetics of solvent extraction is of paramount importance to all industrial applications and is largely determined by the interfacial chemistry. This is particularly important in the design of any type of contactor for a given system. The chemical reaction kinetics determines the size and types of extractors to be used.
1.1. Extraction of ruthenium by tributyl phosphate
The extraction behavior of Nitrosyl ruthenium has been investigated in the past (Fletcher et al., 1955, Siczek and Steindler, 1978, Prescott and Sharp, 1970, Zvyagintsev et al., 1958, Wallace, 1961, Hallaba and Azzam Reda, 1962, Fletcher et al., 1965, Duncan et al., 1966, McKay, 1975, Maya, 1981, Boswell and Soentono, 1981, Pruett, 1980). The overall extraction reaction for the nitrato complexes of nitrosylruthenium in nitric acid-TBP system is represented by the following equation (Schulz et al., 1990)
@(1)
where, x + y = 5.
All these reactions are complex. But the optimal design of an industrial extraction process and equipment for the removal of ruthenium from uranium and plutonium is possible with an understanding of their relative kinetics. In the reported literature very little is available on this topic, though some interpretation can be made from the experience on extraction of uranium with fast contactors such as centrifugal extractor. It is thought appropriate if a structured study is made on the kinetics of ruthenium alone.
Equilibrium aspects of extraction of ruthenium in the system nitric acid-TBP with hydrocarbon diluent system have been extensively studied and are well documented, (Siczek and Steindler, 1978, Prescott and Sharp, 1970, Zvyagintsev et al., 1958, Wallace, 1961, Hallaba and Azzam Reda, 1962, Fletcher et al., 1965, Duncan et al., 1966, McKay, 1975, Maya, 1981, Boswell and Soentono, 1981, Pruett, 1980, Brown et al., 1957) but there is lack of comprehensive information on the kinetic aspects of extraction of ruthenium. Thus, kinetics studies on the extraction of ruthenium have been investigated in the present work. The objective of the present work is to determine the kinetic behavior of ruthenium in the extraction system encountered in PUREX process. For establishing the intrinsic kinetics of extraction of ruthenium the theory of mass transfer with chemical reaction has been used. Under typical PUREX process conditions, trinitrato complex of rutheniumnitrosyl nitrate is the dominant extractable species (Schulz et al., 1990). The extraction reaction in the system, nitrosyl ruthenium-nitric acid-TBP was originally proposed by Brown et al. (1957) as
@(1A)
@(1B)
The present work is concerned with (a) identification of the reaction location, (b) identification of the extraction regime, (c) estimation of the overall rate of extraction and (d) determination of the intrinsic rate constant and mass transfer coefficients. A systematic investigation was performed and a comprehensive model has been developed for the determination of rate parameters.
The rate of metal extraction is largely determined by interfacial chemistry. Most of the reactions involving ionic type reaction are rapid, whereas the rates of reactions involving chelate formation can vary over a considerable range. There are primarily two regimes of extraction – the kinetic regime and the diffusion regime (Danesi, 2004). In a kinetic regime system, the kinetics of solvent extraction can be described in terms of chemical reactions occurring in the bulk phases or at the interface. The number of possible mechanisms is, in principle, very large and only the specific chemical composition of the system determines the controlling mechanism. In diffusion controlled extraction process, kinetic parameters are unimportant and the extraction rate directly depends on specific interfacial area and turbulence. A third and more complex regime is termed as mixed regime. This regime is a combination of the two primary regimes. When both chemical reactions and film diffusion processes occur at rates that are comparable, the solvent extraction kinetics is said to take place in a mixed diffusional-kinetic regime and this is the most complicated case (Astarita, 1966), since the rate of extraction must be described in terms of both diffusional processes and chemical reactions and a complete mathematical description can be obtained only by simultaneously solving the differential equations of diffusion and those of chemical kinetics (Losey et al., 2001).
A variety of contacting techniques like rotating diffusion cell, centrifugal contactor, rising and falling of single drop technique and Lewis cell are used for determining the mass transfer coefficients and kinetics of extraction. The major difference among these experimental techniques is the hydrodynamic conditions, which each of the techniques impose on the extraction system. Among these, the Lewis type stirred cell of constant interfacial area is a convenient apparatus for studying the rate of mass transfer and measuring the individual phase mass transfer coefficients because it allows both constant area between the two phases and a variance of the rate of stirring in a sufficiently broad range.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Standard solutions of ruthenium nitrosyl nitrate in 4 M nitric acid were prepared by diluting the commercially available ruthenium nitrosyl nitrate (supplied by M/s. Arora Matthey Ltd, 1.7% ruthenium by weight in 9 M nitric acid). This solution was kept for aging several days to obtain a feed solution which will simulate the presence of all the forms of ruthenium complexes present in the dissolver solution of spent fuel. Nitric acid supplied by M/s. Fischer Chemicals Ltd (Analytical reagent grade, Min. Assay: 69–71%) was used in the experiments. Tri-n-butyl phosphate purity >99% (Fluka Analytical grade) diluted with n-dodecane (Sigma Aldrich) and was used as the extractant. Analytical reagent grade 1,10- phenanthroline monohydrate supplied by Loba Chemie was used as the chromogenic agent and hydroxylamine chloride (Analytical reagent grade, Merck) and ethanol (Analytical reagent grade) were used in the analysis of ruthenium in aqueous solution by a spectrophotometric method (Banks and O'Laughlin, 1957).
2.2. Experimental set-up
The extraction kinetics was investigated using the constant interfacial area stirred cell as described by Danckwerts, 1970, Doraiswami and Sharma, 1984 and Mundale et al. (1991). The schematic of the constant interfacial area stirred cell is shown in Fig. 1. The stirred cell is a glass vessel provided with a jacket for maintaining constant temperature. The volume of stirred cell is 1.2 × 10−3 m3 with internal diameter of 0.1 m. Vertical baffles were used to avoid vortex formation. The stirred cell is provided with two four-flat blade impeller of 0.05 m diameter and 0.013 m blade height. The impeller blades are placed half dipped in each phase. The impeller speed is varied by an electric motor controller.
Fig. 1. Schematic of the constant interfacial area stirred vessel.
2.3. Procedure
In order to maintain constant acidity in the aqueous and organic phase during experimental run organic phase was pre-equilibrated with nitric acid of required concentration. Aqueous phase was initially added to the stirred cell. Organic phase was subsequently added carefully without disturbing the interface. The impeller was positioned with the upper and lower blades in the middle of respective phases and started immediately. A stop watch was also started simultaneously to measure the time. Samples were withdrawn from the aqueous and organic phases at regular intervals of time and metal concentration in the aqueous solution was analysed by the spectrophotometric method. Each sample size was of 1 mL. About 10–12 samples were taken in each experimental run but the system was treated as being at constant volume in evaluating results as there is no significant change in volume. The duration of each experiment was of 3 h. After completion of the experiment, the two phases were stirred vigorously for half an hour and finally equilibrium sample was collected from the aqueous phase. The distribution coefficient Kd of Ru was determined as the ratio of the metal concentration in the organic phase (calculated from the corresponding aqueous concentration and a mass balance) to its concentration in the aqueous phase at equilibrium condition. The concentration of ruthenium in the aqueous phase (HNO3) was varied in the range of 0.0047–0.0142 kmol m−3 (500–1500 ppm which is a typical concentration encountered in spent fuel reprocessing) for studying the effect of ruthenium concentration. The organic phase comprised of TBP diluted with n-dodecane and concentration was varied in the range 0.733–1.466  kmol m−3 (20–40 vol.%) for studying its effect on the extraction rate. Within the range of impeller speeds between 80 and 140 rpm, the liquid–liquid interface remained practically flat. The volume of aqueous phase was varied in the range of 3 × 10−4–7 × 10−4 m3 and the ratio of aqueous to organic phase was maintained in the range of 0.6–1.4 to study the effect of specific interfacial area. To study the effect of temperature on the extraction rate, experiments were conducted between the temperatures 26–46 °C (293.15 K–319.15 K).
2.4. Reproducibility of experimental data
All the experiments were carried out two times. The average value for each set of experiments is reported in this manuscript. One such data set is shown in Fig. 2. In order to check the precision of experimental results paired t-test was carried out using the two experimental data from the same set. The calculated t value was 1.62. The t value from the table (Arthur Israel Vogel, 1989) (95% confidence table) was found to be 2.23. As tcal < ttab, we can conclude with 95% confidence that there is no significant difference between the two experiments of the same set. In the present work, average value has been selected for the remaining figures and text.
Fig. 2. Reproducibility of experimental data.
3. Results and discussion
Experiments were carried out at different conditions to study the effect of various parameters listed in Table 1 on the extraction rate of ruthenium from aqueous phase (HNO3) to organic phase. Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8 show the plots of ruthenium concentration versus time as functions of initial ruthenium concentration, vol.% of TBP, impeller speed, specific interfacial area, temperature and nitric acid concentration respectively. Specific interfacial area was varied by changing aqueous phase volume.
Table 1. Experimental conditions to study the effect of various parameters on extraction rate.
Fig. 3. Variation of ruthenium concentration in the aqueous phase vs time. T = 300 K; [HNO3] = 2 M; Va = Vo = 5 × 10−4 m3; 110 rpm; [TBP]: 1.095 M.
Fig. 4. Variation of ruthenium concentration vs time at different concentrations of TBP (extractant). T = 300 K; [HNO3] = 2 M; Va = Vo = 5 × 10−4 m3; 110 rpm.
Fig. 5. Variation of ruthenium concentration vs time at different stirring speeds. T = 300 K; [HNO3] = 2 M; Va = Vo = 5 × 10−4 m3; [Ru]aq, t = 0 = 0.0093 kmol/m3; [TBP] = 1.095 M.
Fig. 6. Variation of ruthenium concentration vs time at different specific interfacial area. T = 300 K; [HNO3] = 2 M; 100 rpm; [Ru]aq,t = 0 = 0.0047 kmol/m3; [TBP] = 1.095 M.
Fig. 7. Variation of ruthenium concentration vs time at different temperatures. [HNO3] = 2 M; 110 rpm; [Ru]aq,t = 0 = 0.0047 kmol/m3; Va = Vo = 5 × 10−4 m3; [TBP] = 1.095 M.
Fig. 8. Dependence of acid concentration on the extraction of ruthenium. 110 rpm; [Ru]aq,t = 0 = 0.0093 kmol/m3; Va = Vo = 5 × 10−4 m3; T = 300 K; [TBP] = 1.095 M.
3.1. Identification of the location of extraction reaction
The kinetics of solvent extraction can be described in terms of chemical reactions occurring in the bulk phases or at the interface. If the slow chemical reactions occur in the bulk phases, the initial extraction rate will be independent of interfacial area. On the contrary, a reaction occurring at the interface will show a direct proportionality between the rate and the interfacial area and the plot of extraction rate against area will pass through the origin. Further, when the extractant has little solubility in the aqueous phase, the highest concentration of extractant molecules is at the interface; so, the probability of reaction rate is higher at interface than in the bulk phases.
3.2. Reaction occurring in the bulk phase
Doraiswami and Sharma (1984) have derived rate expressions for different controlling regimes (depending on the respective rates of diffusion and chemical reaction) in detail, explaining the probability of aqueous phase reaction. Very slow reaction regime (Regime-1) is mass transfer independent and thus, Regime-1 is improbable for the present case. For mass transfer (diffusion of A in aqueous phase) controlled regime i.e. slow reaction regime (Regime-2), the extraction rate is given by
@(2)
Concentration profile describing slow reaction in the aqueous phase is shown in Fig. 9. However, in the present study, RV (initial rate) was found to depend upon the ruthenium concentration in aqueous phase [B]aq which is shown in Fig. 10. Therefore, diffusional mass transfer step was not found to be the rate controlling and Regime-2, i.e. diffusion controlled process is ruled out. A fast reaction in the thin film near to interface (Regime-3) is impeller speed independent which was not observed in the present case. Hence, Regime-3 is improbable. Therefore, it was thought desirable to check the validity of an intermediate regime between a slow reaction and fast reaction (Regime between 2 and 3). Under these conditions, the volumetric rate of mass transfer (RV, kmol/m3 s) is given by the following equation which probably holds (Danckwerts, 1970):
@(3)
or,
@(4)
Fig. 9. Concentration profiles describing slow reaction in the aqueous phase.
Fig. 10. Dependence of initial extraction rate of ruthenium with its initial concentration in aqueous phase. [HNO3]: 2 M; [TBP]: 1.095 M; T: 300 K; 100 rpm.
It follows from Eq. (4) that a plot of (RB..a/[A∗])2 vs [B]aq should yield a straight line with slope of (a2 DA.k) and intercept of (kLaq.a)2 which eventually enables the estimation of@  (or, Hatta No., Ha).where, @
The calculated values of @ were in the range of 1.09–1.15. These values are too less to consider the present system representing the fast reaction regime. As explained earlier, the rate of extraction is also dependent on the initial ruthenium concentration (Regime-2 not possible). These two observations collectively make the intermediate regime between a slow reaction and fast reaction (Regime between 2 and 3) improbable. A fast reaction in the thin film near to interface (Regime-3) is impeller speed independent which was not observed in the present case (as shown in Fig. 5). Hence, Regime-3 is ruled out.
In view of the above observations, there is a possibility of rate controlling step to be an instantaneous reaction between [A] and [B]. Then the overall rate of extraction is given by:
@(5)
The above equation does not fit the experimental data. Hence, instantaneous reaction regime (regime-4) is ruled out for the present system.
The properties of extractant like low aqueous phase solubility and surface activity supported the possibility of an interfacial reaction mechanism. Under these conditions, the extractant [A] and ruthenium [B] diffuse and the reaction occurs at the interface. As per the literature data, solubility of TBP in aqueous phase (HNO3) is in the order of 10−3 M (Mishra et al., 2013). Therefore, it is likely that reaction might be taking place at the interfacial region. This statement is further supported by the dependency of initial rate of ruthenium extraction on interfacial area which was found to be directly dependent on the specific interfacial area (as shown in Fig. 11), which is the characteristic of an interfacial reaction. Under this condition, the extractant (A) and ruthenium (B) diffuse and reaction occurs at interface. The relationship between the extraction rate and the interfacial area is an important criterion to dictate whether the chemical reactions that control the rate of extraction occur in the bulk phase or at the interface (Danesi and Chiarizia, 1980, Dietz and Freiser, 1991).
Fig. 11. Variation of the initial rate of extraction process with the specific interfacial area. [HNO3]: 2 M; [TBP]: 1.095 M; [Ru]aq, t= 0 = 0.00489 kmol/m3; T: 300 K, 100 rpm.
Recently Gadgil et al. (2014) studied the extraction kinetics of uranium in D2EHPA-TBP and D2EHPA-TOPO systems in a constant interfacial area stirred cell. They developed model equations for purely diffusion controlled (of A and B) and mixed (diffusion and reaction) controlled for interfacial reaction. The present study follows similar approach for the development of model equations for diffusion and mixed diffusional-kinetic regimes.
3.3. Reaction occurring at interface
3.3.1. Kinetic controlled interfacial reaction regime
In this regime, diffusional factors are unimportant and the extraction rate is governed by the kinetic parameters. Rate of reaction between extractant molecule (TBP) and the metal ion (Ru) in this case is much slower than the rate of transport of respective molecules. The concentration profiles for this case are depicted schematically in Fig. 12. The transfer of solute from aqueous to organic phase can be described as
@(6)
Fig. 12. Concentration profiles describing slow reaction at the interface.
If the mass transfer process could be assumed as a pseudo first-order reaction with respect to the metal ion (ruthenium) concentration (as solvent concentration is large), the following rate equation holds:
@(7)
where kao and koa are the forward and reverse pseudo-first-order apparent rate constants respectively, S represents the interfacial area and V = Va = Vo is the volume of aqueous or organic solution.
@(8)
and
@(9)
The apparent equilibrium constant based on the Eq. (6) can be written as
@(10)
@(11)
Then, extraction rate equation can be obtained as
@(12)
@(13)
@(14)
@(15)
@(16)
@(17)
or,
@(18)
Integration of Eq. (18) gives
@(19)
Likewise, Eq. (20) can also be derived.
@(20)
From the slopes of the plots of ln(1−[B]o/[B]oe) versus time, values of koa and kao are evaluated.
3.4. Diffusion controlled interfacial reaction regime
In this regime, rate of extraction is controlled by diffusional mass transfer rate and the rate of reaction between reactant molecules is faster than the diffusion rate of extractant and metal ion towards the interface where reaction takes place. Concentration profiles for this case are shown in Fig. 13. The chemical reaction between the extractant and solute in symbolic form can be written as
@(21)
@(22)
or,
@(23)
Fig. 13. Concentration profiles describing interfacial reaction diffusion controlled regime.
Molar flux for each species is obtained from two film theory:
@(24)
@(25)
@(26)
At steady state,
@(27)
Assuming that diffusion coefficient depends only on the nature of the phase, then
@(28)
Making use of Eqs. (24), (25), (26), (27), (28), interfacial concentration of each species can be written as follows:
@(29)
@(30)
@(31)
Substitution of these interfacial concentration values in the equilibrium relation (23), the equilibrium constant given in Eq. (32) is derived.
@(32)
It is assumed that concentration of A is practically the same in the bulk and interface. It does not change appreciably with time.
@(33)
From the mass balance, Eq. (34) can be obtained.
@(34)
By substituting Eqs. (33), (34) in Eq. (32) we get,
@(35)
On rearrangement,
@(36)
@(37)
@(38)
@(39)
Upon integration of Eq. (39) results
@(40)
Eq. (37) gives the rate expression for the diffusion controlled interfacial reaction regime and Eq. (40) gives the bulk ruthenium concentration in the aqueous phase with time.
3.5. Mixed diffusional–kinetic regime
When chemical reactions and film diffusion processes occur at rates that are comparable, the solvent extraction kinetics are said to take place in a mixed diffusional-kinetic regime, which in engineering, is often referred to as “mass transfer with slow chemical reactions.” This is the most complicated case, since the rate of extraction must be described in terms of both diffusional processes and chemical reactions, and a complete mathematical description can be obtained only by simultaneously solving the differential equations of diffusion and those of chemical kinetics.
Chemical reaction flux can be written as
@(41)
@(42)
Comparing Eq. (42) with Eq. (22), one obtains
p = 1, n = 1 and m = z
then Eq. (42) becomes,
@(43)
On substitution of interfacial concentration values in Eq. (41), we get
@(44)
It is assumed that the concentration of A is practically the same in the bulk and interface and it does not change appreciably with time.
@(45)
Then Eq. (44) becomes,
@(46)
Rearranging Eq. (46),
@(47)
From mass balance we can write,
@(48)
Rate expression can then be written as,
@(49)
On rearrangement
@(50)
Now,
@(51)
On rearrangement we get
@(52)
Eq. (53) is derived by integrating Eq. (52).
@(53)
Eq. (51) gives the rate expression for the mixed diffusional-kinetic regime and Eq. (53) gives the bulk ruthenium concentration in the aqueous phase with time.
3.6. Identification of extraction regime
In order to estimate the contribution of diffusional mass transfer to the overall rate of the extraction, impeller speed dependency was checked. In a constant interfacial area cell, the thickness of the stagnant interfacial film is thicker at lower impeller speed and diffusion limits the rate because of relatively fast chemical reaction. With increase in impeller speed, stationary diffusion film becomes thinner and the diffusional resistance becomes smaller. At some value of stirring speed, the extraction rate may be limited to either chemical reaction only, or may be independent of the stirring speed, which is called a kinetic plateau (Mundale et al., 1991).
Fig. 14 shows the variation of initial extraction rate with the intensity of agitation. It is observed that the rate of extraction increases with impeller speed very sharply initially and subsequent increase in extraction rate with impeller speed is less. Hence, it is likely that at some value of stirring speed, the extraction rate may be limited by chemical reaction only. In the present study, the maximum stirring speed was limited to 140 rpm as above this speed interface was not flat.
Fig. 14. Variation of initial extraction rate of Ru with stirring speed. [HNO3]: 2 M; [TBP]: 1.095 M; T: 300 K; [Ru]aq, t = 0 = 0.0094 M.
Eq. (20) is the expression for the ruthenium concentration with time for the kinetically controlled interfacial reaction regime and was checked for its validity. According to this equation, the slopes of the plot of ln(1−[B]o/[B]oe) against time give values of koa and kao and they were evaluated at different stirring speed to study the influence of the agitation speed on kao. All the plots were nearly straight lines as could be seen from Fig. 15.
Fig. 15. Plot of ln(1−[B]o/[B]oe) against time with the variation of stirring speed.
Fig. 16 shows the variation of apparent rate constant (kao) with stirring speed. It is observed from this figure that kao increases sharply with stirring speed initially and as a result of lower diffusional resistance at higher stirring intensity, increase in kao values was observed to be less. In view of the above observations, the overall extraction rate of ruthenium probably depends on both mass transfer and chemical reaction rate at the interface.
Fig. 16. Effect of stirring speed on apparent reaction rate constant (kao). T = 300 K; [HNO3] = 2 M; [Ru]aq, t = 0 = 9.3 × 10−3 kmol/m3; Va = Vo = 5 × 10−4 m3.
Another criterion that enables to distinguish between a diffusion-controlled and a kinetics regime is the experimental determination of the activation energy of the extraction process. The effect of temperature on the extraction rate of ruthenium by TBP was studied in the temperature range of 293.15–319.15 K. It was found that the initial extraction rate decreased sharply at temperatures lower than 299.15 K and it decreased slowly at temperatures higher than 299.15 K as could be observed from Fig. 17. A rise in temperature increases reaction rates but will have complicated effects of fluid dynamics, on extractability of ruthenium Table 2 reveals that the distribution coefficient (Kd) decreases with increase in temperature. The apparent activation energy (Ea) for the extraction of ruthenium was calculated to be 8.5 kJ mol−1 in the temperature range of 293.15–319.15 K, from the slope of the plot of ln(kao) against 1/T, as shown in Fig. 18. The value of 8.5 kJ mol−1 for Ea suggests a possible diffusion controlled regime in the temperature range of 293.15–319.15 K. In general, if the rate is controlled by chemical reaction, Ea is > 40 kJ mol−1, but if the extraction rate is controlled by diffusion process, Ea is < 12–15 kJ mol−1, whilst values between 15 and 40 kJ mol−1 indicate mixed controlled regime (Kizim, 1991, Yu and Ji, 1992).
Fig. 17. Initial extraction rate of ruthenium as a function of temperature. [HNO3]: 2 M; [Ru]aq,t = 0: 0.0973 kmol/m3; [TBP]: 1.095 M; 100 rpm.
Table 2. Variation of apparent rate constant and distribution coefficient with temperature.
Fig. 18. Effect of temperature on apparent reaction rate constant (kao). [HNO3]: 2 M; [Ru]aq, t=0: 0.00973 kmol/m3; [TBP]: 1.095 M; 100 rpm.
Eq. (40) is the expression for ruthenium concentration with time for diffusion controlled interfacial reaction. The experimental data on ruthenium concentration vs time were fitted into Eq. (40) using a nonlinear regression technique to obtain mass transfer coefficients that best correlate the experimental [Ru]aq. The best values were obtained by minimizing the following objective function:
@(54)
where, ‘n’ is the number of observations. Computations were performed using MATLAB software, which has built-in algorithm to perform a nonlinear least-squares data fit by Nelder–Mead Search method. A MATLAB program was written to evaluate the parameters using algorithm of this method. The determined values of mass transfer coefficients are tabulated in Table 3. Fig. 19 shows the typical example of comparison between experimental and calculated values of [B]aq using Eq. (40). It is observed that Eq. (40) holds good for the present case.
Table 3. Experimental results for diffusion controlled interfacial reaction regime.
Fig. 19. Comparison between experimental and calculated values of [B]aq versus time for diffusion controlled interfacial reaction regime. [HNO3]: 2 M; [Ru]aq,t = 0: 0.0973 kmol/m3; [TBP]: 1.095 M.
The activation energy for the mass transfer coefficient was calculated from the slope of ln(kLaq) vs. 1/T plot and its value was found to be 10.5 kJ/mol in the temperature range 293.15–319.15 K. Even though the value of Ea suggests a possible diffusion controlled regime in the temperature range 293.15–319.15 K, it is apparent from Fig. 19 that the concentration profiles tend to converge and reaching asymptote with increase in stirring speed due to decrease in the diffusional resistance. It is likely that at higher values of stirring speed, contribution from diffusional mass transfer will reach a minimum, beyond which it will have no influence on the values of mass transfer coefficients, indicating the possible contribution of intrinsic chemical reaction to the overall rate. Therefore, it was thought desirable to develop a comprehensive model consisting of both the steps of mass transfer and interfacial chemical reaction. Eq. (51) gives the rate expression for the mixed controlled interfacial reaction and Eq. (53) gives the ruthenium concentration with respect to time.
Eq. (53), the expression for ruthenium concentration with time for the mixed controlled interfacial reaction regime was solved for computing mass transfer coefficients and intrinsic rate constant by nonlinear regression analysis (as described in this section earlier). The calculated results are given in Table 4. It is observed that the rate of extraction was the highest at 2 M HNO3 and the lowest was at 4 M HNO3. This is probably due to the decrease in Kd with acidity. The mixed controlled interfacial reaction regime represented by Eq. (53) holds good for the present system (as shown in Fig. 20). The activation energy for the intrinsic rate constant value was found to be 15.6 kJ mol−1. This value of activation energy indicates that the overall extraction rate is controlled by both the intrinsic kinetics and the mass transfer of the species involved. A reasonable estimate of individual mass transfer coefficients can be obtained from the correlation (Eq. (55)), which is developed on the basis of present study
@(55)
where, v and ω are the kinematic viscosity/m2 s−1 of the respective phase and impeller speed rad s−1 respectively. The Wilke–Chang correlation (Wilke and Pin, 1955) was used to calculate the diffusion coefficients which was required in the calculation of Schmidt number.
Table 4. Experimental results for mixed controlled interfacial reaction regime.
Fig. 20. Comparison between experimental and calculated values of [B]aq vs. time for mixed controlled regime. [Ru]aq, t = 0: 0.0973 kmol/m3; [TBP]: 1.095 M.
The present study also suggests that improvement in the decontamination of uranium and plutonium from ruthenium might be achieved when the extraction process is performed in short residence time contactors (i.e. centrifugal extractors) due to the difference in the rate of extraction of these elements. Similar conclusion was made by Schlea et al., 1963, Kishbaugh, 1963 and Orth et al. (1971). The extraction of uranium and plutonium is diffusion controlled and reaches 99% of the equilibrium value in 0.6–6 s. (Pushlenkov et al., 1974, Bergeonneau et al., 1977). On the other hand, rate-controlling process in the extraction of ruthenium is both intrinsic kinetics (formation of solvation complex) and the diffusion rates of the species involved. Hence, it is concluded that the overall rate of extraction of ruthenium is much slower than the diffusion controlled extraction process of uranium and plutonium. This was further supported by the fact that it required several minutes to reach extraction equilibrium as is observed from Fig. 21. Experiments were conducted in a stirred cell at an impeller speed of 800 rpm at different acid concentration for extraction of ruthenium by TBP. The difference in the effective extraction rates may thus, provide a basis for improved decontamination of uranium and plutonium from ruthenium.
Fig. 21. Distribution coefficient of ruthenium as a function of time during extraction.
4. Conclusions
The extraction kinetics of ruthenium with tri-n-butyl phosphate dissolved in n-dodecane has been investigated. The extraction of ruthenium by TBP was found to be an interfacial reaction. Dependence of extraction rate on stirring speed, temperature, specific interfacial area, and the concentrations of reactant and nitric acid has been studied using constant interfacial stirred cell. The overall extraction rate was found to be controlled by both the intrinsic kinetics and the mass transfer of the species involved, for which a comprehensive model has been developed. Analysis of experimental data resulted in values of intrinsic rate constant, mass transfer coefficients and location of reaction. This study also suggests that improvement in the decontamination of uranium and plutonium from ruthenium might be achieved when the extraction process is performed in short residence time contactors (i.e. centrifugal extractors) due to the difference in the rate of extraction of these elements.
