<title>Verification of the Aerosol/Lm Module in Experiments on Sodium Burning in Moist Air</title>
<author>P. V. Kolobaeva; N. A. Mosunova; A. A. Sorokin</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Safety Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences (IBRAE RAS), Moscow, Russia</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Atomic Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer Nature </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-020-00635-1</DOI>
<URL>http://sci-hub.ren/10.1007/s10512-020-00635-1</URL>
The results of verifi cation of the module for sodium aerosol behavior in moist air in an enclosure on experiments performed using the ATF facility (India) are reported. The computational results for the average diameter of aerosols suspended in air with different moisture content and initial mass concentration were
compared with the experimental data. The sensitivity of the computational results to the uncertainty in setting the initial experimental data and parameters of the model is analyzed. The average relative error of the calculation of the average aerosol diameter was 19%.
The present article is devoted to the verifi cation of the AEROSOL/LM module in the sphere of modeling of the formation and behavior of the aerosols of sodium burning in enclosures in NPP [1]. Liquid sodium can ignite when spilled in air.
As a result, fi ne aerosols of the oxides Na2O and Na2O2 are discharged into the atmosphere in the enclosures. The primary mechanisms of their subsequent behavior are absorption of water vapor, coagulation, and precipitation. Some of the main parameters determining the behavior of the aerosols of sodium burning in an atmosphere of enclosures are their diameter and concentration. To validate the AEROSOL/LM module for the calculation of the behavior of sodium aerosols, a series of experiments studying the infl uence of the moisture content of the air on the change of the diameter and the precipitation of the aerosols was modeled on the ATF facility (India) [2, 3].
The method of calculating aerosol behavior using an approximation of the method of fractions was modifi ed for modeling the condensation and evaporation of different vapors on aerosols. The multi-component composition of the deposits is taken into account in the calculation of the formation of deposits on the walls. This makes it possible, when necessary, to calculate the residual heat release on surfaces. The module makes it possible to model the formation of multi-component aerosols of the products of fi ssion and combustion of sodium and the distribution of their diameter. The database of the aerosol module is based on the following selection criteria: the radionuclide composition of the gases, aerosols, and deposits on surfaces and the components infl uencing the composition, mass, and rate of precipitation of the aerosols. By accounting for these factors, it becomes possible to model the dynamic properties and composition of the aerosols and, in consequence, the radiation safety.
Experiments on the ATF facility. This facility consists of a cylindrical vessel with volume 1 m3, height 0.6 m, and inner diameter 1.5 m (Fig. 1). The temperature of the gas atmosphere was 25–30°C and the atmospheric pressure was 0.1 MPa. The aerosols were formed in a separate vessel with argon for burning sodium heated to 550°C and oxygen introduced. Aerosols entered the chamber when the valve separating the combustion vessel from the working part of the facility (aerosol chamber) was opened. The recording setup made it possible to follow the time variation of the diameter of the aerosol particles. To investigate the effect of the moisture content of the gas atmosphere on the rate of growth, several series of experiments with duration 5000 sec and with relative moisture content 20, 50, and 90% were conducted. The initial mass-average diameter of the aerosols on the working section of the setup was equal to 0.98, 1.1, and 1.8 μm, respectively. The experiments were performed with aerosol concentration 0.5 and 3 g/m3  and error ±10%, the initial diameter of the aerosol particles being preserved. The phase density was equal to 2120 kg/m3.
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the ATF experimental facility: 1) sodium combustion chamber; 2) valve; 3) setup for recording the aerosols; 4) aerosol diameter sensor.
FIg. 2. Time variation of the experimental (A), computed maximum (1), average (2), and minimum diameter (3) of aerosols with relative moisture content 20 (a, b), 50 (c, d), and 90% (e, ƒ) and initial aerosol concentration 0.5 (a, c, e) and 3 g/m3 (b, d, ƒ).
Computational scheme. The behavior of the sodium oxide aerosols was calculated using the AEROSOL/LM module and the experimental phase density. The initial diameter distribution was taken to be monodisperse in accordance with the measured mass-average diameter of sodium oxide aerosols at the ingress into the working volume of the facility. The size of the modeled aerosols (input parameter of the module) was equal to 0.1–100 μm.
In the calculations, the choice of the parameters of the computational scheme was validated fi rst: the time step and the number of aerosol fractions. To check convergence, the calculations were performed with 50, 100, 200, 300, and 400 fraction. It was found that for more than 100 fractions the calculations do not change.
Results. The main computational result for comparing with experimental data was the time dependence of the mass-average diameter of the sodium aerosols suspended in air containing water. In Fig. 2 we can see that the average diameter increases in time. The primary mechanism determining the growth of aerosols under these conditions is coagulation.
Correspondingly, the growth rate of the diameter of the aerosols for initial concentration 3 g/m3
is higher than 0.5 g/m3. Thisis associated with the fact that in the fi rst case coagulation is more effective as a result of an increase of concentration. The computational results are systematically somewhat understated compared with experiments with initial aerosol concentration in the vessel 0.5 g/m3 (see Fig. 2a, c, e). This difference can be explained by an overstated rate of precipitation in the calculation. In turn, this can be associated with an overstated mass of water in the aerosols or with the use of the conservative assumption of constant phase density independent of the mass of the absorbed water. Agreement between the calculations and experimental data obtained for a series with initial concentration of suspended aerosols 3 g/m3  (see Fig. 2b, d, ƒ). For this case, the average relative error did not exceed 11%.
The uncertainty of the computational results was analyzed in several steps according to the procedure of [4]. First,
the initial and boundary parameters that could infl uence the calculations were determined. They include the initial data of the experiment and model: initial air temperature in the vessel T (±3 K), initial aerosol mass concentration C0 (±10%), phase density ρph (±20%) of inundated aerosols, and initial diameter d0 (±20%) of inundated aerosols, which depends on the moisture content of the air, composition and mass of the dry particles of the products of sodium burning in humid air. It should be noted that the use of the average moisture content for the entire volume of the vessel can introduce an error in the computational results, because in the general case it is not uniform. However, it is diffi cult to take this factor into account in the channel code.
The geometric parameters are known quite accurately from the description of the experimental setup, so that their infl uence in the analysis of uncertainties is not considered.
The range of variation of the chosen parameters was determined at the second step in accordance with the indicated errors, type of distribution (in this case the normal distribution is adopted) and the number computations. It is important to know that the number of computations determines the accuracy of the calculation of the sensitivity coeffi cients and the probability with which the chosen computational interval covers the given range in accordance with Wilk’s formula [4]. The number of computations was taken to be 200, which ensures coverage of a bilateral interval with probability above 0.95/0.95. Next, calculations in which the normally distributed parameters were chosen randomly in their range of variation were performed.
Statistical analysis of the results was performed at the third step, and the coeffi cients of sensitivity to a change of the parameters were determined. As an example, we give in Table 1 the computed sensitivity coeffi cients of Spearman’s rank correlation for the average diameter of aerosol suspended in air with relative moisture content 20 and 50% and initial concentration 0.5 and 3 g/m3. Analysis shows that initial aerosol diameter in tests with initial concentrations 0.5 g/m3(variants 1 and 3) has
a signifi cant infl uence on the computational result. The sensitivity coeffi cient is close to 1 for these variants. At high initial concentration 3 g/m3  (variants 2 and 4), the phase density has the greatest infl uence on the average diameter. The temperature of the medium does not signifi cantly affect the average diameter. At lower initial concentration 0.5 g/m3 (variants 1 and 3), its variation does not greatly affect the fi nal diameter of the aerosol. For comparison, at higher concentration 3 g/m3(variants 2and 4), its variation relative to the average value appreciably affects the aerosol diameter, which is associated with coagulation.
As a result of the analysis, the minimum, average, and maximum diameter of the aerosol was obtained as a function of time (see Fig. 2). For each series, the obtained corridor of the computational values covers the range of experimental points within their measurement error ±20% [2]. The average relative error of the computer diameter of aerosols suspended in air as
compared with the experimental error was equal to 19%.