<title>Utilization of nuclear waste plutonium and thorium mixed fuel in candu reactors</title>
<author>Sümer Şahin; Başar Şarer; Yurdunaz Çelik</author>
<Affiliation>Faculty of Engineering ATILIM University 06836 İncek Gölbaşı Ankara Turkey ; Faculty of Science Gazi University Teknikokullar 06500 Ankara Turkey ; Institute of Science and Technology Gazi University 06500 Ankara Turkey</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.3464</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/er.3464</URL>
Summary
Spent nuclear fuel out of conventional light water reactors contains significant amount of even plutonium isotopes, so called reactor grade plutonium. Excellent neutron economy of Canada deuterium uranium (CANDU) reactors can further burn reactor grade plutonium, which has been used as a booster fissile fuel material in form of mixed ThO2/PuO2 fuel in a CANDU fuel bundle in order to assure reactor criticality. The paper investigates incineration of nuclear waste and the prospects of exploitation of rich world thorium reserves in CANDU reactors.
In the present work, the criticality calculations have been performed with 3-D geometrical modeling of a CANDU reactor, where the structure of all fuel rods and bundles is represented individually. In the course of time calculations, nuclear transformation and radioactive decay of all actinide elements as well as fission products are considered.
Four different fuel compositions have been selected for investigations: ① 95% thoria (ThO2) + 5% PuO2, ② 90% ThO2 + 10% PuO2, ③ 85% ThO2 + 15% PuO2 and ④ 80% ThO2 + 20% PuO2. The latter is used for the purpose of denaturing the new 233U fuel with 238U. The behavior of the criticality k∞ and the burnup values of the reactor have been pursued by full power operation for ~10 years.
Among the investigated four modes, 90% ThO2 + 10% PuO2 seems a reasonable choice. This mixed fuel would continue make possible extensive exploitation of thorium resources with respect to reactor criticality. Reactor will run with the same fuel charge for ~7 years and allow a fuel burnup ~55 GWd/t. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1 Introduction
Uranium is the sole natural nuclear fuel. In the course of reactor operation, plutonium and higher minor actinides (MA) will be created through multiple nuclear transformations. Nuclear spent fuel of light water reactors (LWRs) contains significant amount of still contained precious nuclear material in form of plutonium and other MA. Over the years, large quantities of reactor grade plutonium (RG-Pu) have been accumulated in the nuclear waste of civilian LWRs and Canada deuterium uranium (CANDU) reactors worldwide. Total amount of the RG-Pu is estimated to exceed 1700 tons 1, 2. It is of general interest to reduce plutonium inventories, because of the serious public and political concern in the world about misuse of this plutonium and about accidental release of highly radiotoxic material to the environment. This has initiated Korean researchers to investigate the direct use of spent pressurized water reactor (PWR) fuel in CANDU reactors (DUPIC) in that context. In a physics study, direct use of spent PWR fuel in CANDU reactors has been analyzed 3. A radio-toxicity analysis of fuel cycles has found out that the toxicity of the DUPIC option based on 1 GWel.yr is much smaller than those of other fuel cycle options such as the PWR once-through mode, mixed oxide fuel-recycling mode, and CANDU once-through mode 4.
On the other hand, nuclear fuel energy sources are limited and should be used carefully. Conventional nuclear reactors can make use ~1% of uranium resources with plutonium recycle. 238U isotope constitutes >99% of uranium reserves and cannot be used. World thorium (Th) reserves are estimated to be three to four times more abundant than the nat-U reserves. RG-Pu can serve as the initial driver fuel mixed with the fertile fuels 232Th and 238U. The possibility of the utilization of these materials in different reactors provides new research subjects for scientists and engineers. The exploitation of thorium fuel reserves besides uranium reserves, mixed thoria, and urania (ThO2/UO2) fuel cycles has been considered for LWRs in previous work 5-7. The strategy of thorium fuel cycle in CANDU reactors is addressed in 8. CANDU reactors using thorium fuel mixed with low enriched uranium have also been analyzed 9.
Recently, a number of studies have been conducted to search the possibility of further exploitation of these precious RG-Pu and MA in heavy water or graphite moderated nuclear reactors, having a better neutron economy than LWRs. Previous work has investigated intensively the utilization potential of RG-Pu and MA in the form of a mixed ThO2/PuO2 fuel in CANDU reactors and fixed bed nuclear reactors 10-18. These studies have been conducted under consideration of the transmutation and radioactive decay of all heavy metal isotopes with high precision in S8-P3 energy groups using 238 neutron groups. However, the neutronic calculations had been performed in 1-D cylindrical geometry, and the fission products were neglected. These generic studies looked very promising with respect to high fuel burnup and long operation periods. Hence, it is warranted to pursue these investigations with more realistically 3-D geometry models. Other workers have investigated utilization of nuclear waste actinides in gas turbine modular helium reactors and pebble bed modular reactors with 3-D geometry models 19-23. CANDU as a heavy water moderated reactor has an excellent neutron economy. Hence, it is warranted to extend the investigation to the use of thorium and nuclear waste RG-Pu with 3-D modeling in this work.
2 Description of the Reactor
Investigations are conducted for a typical CANDU-thorium reactor design concept, described in references. 24, 25, and corresponding to the classical GENTILLY-II design 26. Figure 1 shows the 3-D Monte Carlo Neutron Photon eXtended transport code (MCNPX) modeling of the CANDU reactor. The CANDU reactor core and reflector are contained in the calandria vessel, which has a thickness of 2.86 cm and is made of American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 304 L steel. The material composition is given in references 10, 27.
Figure 1
MCNP(X) modeling of Canada deuterium uranium (CANDU) reactor (vertical section).
The reactor core is assembled of 380 fuel channels. Figure 2 shows the structure of a fuel channel (top right). The calandria tubes are made of zircalloy-2 with a composition, given references 10, 28. They are embedded in D2O moderator at low temperature (<71 °C) and at ~ 100-kPa pressure, arranged in square arrays; see Figure 2, top left. The nuclear heat is generated in pressure tubes in the fuel bundle region and transferred with D2O coolant to the power conversion system. Pressure tubes are made of Zr-Nb with the composition, given in Table I in reference 29. D2O coolant enters the tubes at 266 °C and leaves at 310 °C at a pressure of ~ 10 MPa 30. The pressure and calandria tubes are separated through a gap in order to assure an effective heat barrier between D2O moderator at low temperature and D2O coolant at high temperature. The gap is filled with CO2 gas.
Figure 2Cross section thorough a fuel bundle. (Moderator per fuel channel is indicated on top left).
In the standard CANDU design, each fuel channel contains 37 fuel rods in the fuel bundle zone in quasi-honeycomb arrangement, as shown in Figure 2 on the right side. Calandria tubes, containing a fuel bundle and coolant, are imbedded in the D2O moderator in square array arrangement, top left. A typical fuel rod is depicted on the bottom left of the Figure 2 with cladding and D2O coolant share. The cladding of the rod is made of zircalloy-4 with a composition, given in reference 31. In the present work, four different fuel compositions are considered with one conservative and three new candidates for CANDU reactors as follows:
Mode ①: 95% thoria (ThO2) + 5% PuO2.
Mode ②: 90% thoria (ThO2) + 10% PuO2.
Mode ③: 85% thoria (ThO2) + 15% PuO2.
Mode ④: 80% thoria (ThO2) + 20% PuO2.
Neutronic calculations are described in Section 3.
3 Numerical Calculations
Numerical calculations have been carried out with MCNPX-2.7.0 32 in 3-D modeling using continuous energy cross sections. All fuel bundles and fuel rods are defined individually, Figure 1. Fuel, cladding, and moderator are represented separately, as shown in Figure 2 clearly. This is very important to perform criticality calculation for a moderating reactor, because the neutron spectrums in the fuel and moderator regions have entirely different character. Temporal calculations during the reactor operations are carried out with the CINDER'90 Version 07.4 Code 33, imbedded in the MCNPX-2.7.0 code.
3.1 Criticality and burn-up
In the course of reactor operation, fissile fuel will be burnt-up, and some new fissile elements such as 233U, 239Pu, and 241Pu will be produced, through neutron capture in breeding isotopes, such as 232Th, 238U, 240Pu, and 242Pu, respectively. The CANDU reactor uses an on-power refueling scheme to provide sufficient reactivity during reactor operation without reactor shutdown, as natural uranium does not allow sufficient excess reactivity for long-time operation. The on-power refueling results in a continuous distribution of fuel burn up in the core. An analytical method has been suggested to estimate the average discharge burn up through the following equation 34, 35:
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3464:er3464-math-0001
@(1)
where Wdis is the estimated discharge burn up and k(w) is the infinite multiplication factor from the lattice calculation. The discharge burn up is determined such that the positive and negative terms (against k0) are compensated each other. The k0 is typically 1.05 ~ 1.06 considering the leakage from the core, xenon equilibrium, and parasitic absorption in the core. This method has been shown to be reliable because the discharge burn up estimated by this method became consistent with that of 3-D core calculation. If the CANDU core is loaded with high reactivity fuel, the discharge burn up increases, and the k∞ of the high reactivity fuel can be allowed smaller than that of the natural uranium. This means that the discharge burn up of high reactivity fuel could be even higher. In the present work, discharge burn up has been pursued until reaching a reactor reactivity down to around keff = 1.06 in order to be conservative.
With this consideration in mind, temporal variations of fissionable isotopes, criticality (keff), and burn-up in a fuel bundle are calculated for a total reactor power level of 640 MWel and 2180 MWth 24. Figure 3 shows the reactor criticality for the investigated four mixed oxide modes. Even with a small quantity of 5% RG-Pu, the reactor can operate ~3 years at full power and can reach a fuel burnup of ~25 GWd/t, comparable with LWRs. A mixed fuel with 10% PuO2 and 90% ThO2 can operate ~7 years at full power with the same fuel charge and can reach a burnup level of as high as ~55 GWd/t. This would allow one to exploit a great quantity of thorium with a modest amount of RG-Pu out of the LWR nuclear waste. Investigations in the following sections will be pursued with this mode. Increase of RG-Pu in the mixed fuel would increase the operation time to >10 years and the burnup level to ~80 GWd/t and beyond.
Figure 3The reactor critically keff and the fuel burn-up as a function of operation period. Mode 1: 95% 232ThO2 + 5% PuO2 . Mode 2: 90% 232ThO2 + 10% PuO2. Mode 3: 85% 232ThO2 + 15% PuO2. Mode 4: 80% 232ThO2 + 20% PuO2.
3.2 Neutron spectrum
Neutron flux spectrum in the core has paramount importance for all neutron-induced nuclear reactions, which includes the fission energy production, the isotope contents evolution along burnup, breeding, and others. Neutron flux spectrum can vary throughout the core. Figure 4 shows the neutron spectra at the beginning of life (BOL) in the fuel rods at three different locations different, viz., in the core center, in the core outer region adjacent to the reflector and in the middle of those locations for a CANDU reactor containing 10% RG-PuO2 and 90% ThO2. One can recognize two maxima clearly. The first one is by ~1 MeV, indicating the fission neutron spectrum. D2O is an excellent moderator with negligible neutron absorption. This is reflected by the second flux maximum as a well-shaped Maxwellian thermal energy spectrum by <0.1. In CANDU reactors with such a soft energy spectrum, the fast fission factor is relatively low ε = ~1.03. Hence, thermal energy spectrum is the dominant factor for both fission energy production, as well as breeding and nuclear transformation processes through (n,γ) reactions of the actinide isotopes. The flux depth by ~1 eV arises from the resonance absorption cross sections of the plutonium isotopes in the mixed fuel. The neutron flux spectrum suffers a continuous attenuation from the core center towards the core periphery because of the neutron leakage, as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4Neutron energy spectrum in the center, middle, and outer fuel rods for the mixed fuel of 10% RG-PuO2 + 90% ThO2 at start-up.
3.3 Fission power generation
The great part of fission energy will be converted to heat energy directly in the fuel in situ. There will be minor heat release in the moderator via neutron and γ-radiation. Figure 5 shows the heat energy generation density, that is, the fission power density (FPD) in the core through the section, passing in the middle of axial height at the BOL for a total reactor power of 2180 MWth. FPD has the highest value of ~ 150 W/cm3 in the central fuel rod. Around the middle core region between the center and the periphery, FPD decreases to ~109 W/cm3. In the peripheral core region, FPD falls down to 34 W/cm3. This is a direct consequence of the flux attenuation from the core center towards the periphery, shown in Figure 4. The power profile in the core changes because of non-uniform fuel burnup. Figure 6 shows the FPD at the end of life (EOL), which is ~114 W/cm3 in the central fuel rod. FPD is to ~89 W/cm3 around the middle core region and falls to ~26 W/cm3 in the periphery. Energy release in the moderator around the fuel channel through neutron and γ-ray heating is ~3 orders of magnitude lower than in the fuel region. It is 0.58 and 0.06 W/cm3 in the core center and peripheral region during the BOL, respectively. In the EOL, these fall slightly to 0.52 and 0.054 W/cm3. Hence, moderator temperature remains low during plant operation. CO2 gap
Figure 5Heat energy generation density in the core at the beginning of life.
Figure 6Heat energy generation density in the core at the end of life.
3.4 Time evolution of actinide isotopes
In the course of reactor operation, actinide isotopes undergo several transmutation processes through neutron interaction and radioactive decay, as depicted in Figure 7 11, 12, 15. Time evolution of actinide isotope densities until EOL for mode ② is shown in Figure 8, averaged over the core. One observes a continuous depletion of the main initial fissile isotope 239Pu and accumulation of the new isotope 233U out of thorium. However, the build-up of 233U progresses relatively slow and is far away from compensating the decline of 239Pu. Hence, the criticality keff decreases along with reactor operation continuously. 239Pu has also a sizable neutron capture cross section at thermal energies (σγ = 270 barn vs. σf = 752 barn), generating the 240Pu isotope, which increases slowly in the first 5 years of reactor operation despite a continuous depletion of the latter. This is directly related to the high level thermal neuron flux, shown in Figure 4. Along with the decline of the density of the source isotope 239Pu, 240Pu begins to decline slowly to about the same amount at the EOL of ~7 years for the fuel composition according to mode ②. 240Pu generates 241Pu, which is also a valuable fissile fuel. 241Pu burnup is partially compensated through 240Pu(n,γ)241Pu reaction, mainly in thermal energies. Hence, the decline of 241Pu progresses slowly. At the end of reactor operation, the final spent fuel contains nearly the same amount of non-fissile even isotopes and fissile odd isotopes. This can further be burnt partially in fast breeders and more effectively in fusion-fission (hybrid) reactors 36 and in accelerator driven systems 37. Finally, Figure 9 shows the decline of the fertile isotope 232Th in 7 years, which makes ~3% of the initial thorium charge. This will have only minor effects on neutron spectrum of the reactor.
Figure 7Transmutation scheme of the actinide isotopes.
Figure 8 Density variations of the main fissile and fissionable isotopes for the mixed fuel of 10% RG-PuO2 + 90% ThO2.
image
Figure 9 Density variation of the breeder material 232Th for the mixed fuel of 10% RG-PuO2 + 90% ThO2.
4 Conclusions
Canada deuterium uranium reactors can burn reactor grade plutonium out of the nuclear waste of LWRs mixed with thorium. A mixed fuel made of 10% RG-Pu and 90% thorium can run the reactor successfully for ~ 7 years with the same fuel charge producing energy in the range of 55 GWd/t, never attainable with natural uranium neither fueled conventional CANDU reactors nor even with LWRs. The latter can attain burnup levels in the range of 7000–10,000 GWd/t and 30,000–40,000 GWd/t, respectively. This brings the following two main advantages:
Plutonium in LWR nuclear waste can further produce energy. This means disposal of his waste, for which the LWR operator can pay. Fuel cost becomes negative for the CANDU reactor operator.
Utilization of significant amount of thorium extends the nuclear fuel resources.
