<title>Tracing ancient silk route by nuclear-analytical technique</title>
<Affiliation>1.Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, 1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata 700064, India
2.Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247667, India
3.Department of Archaeology, University of Calcutta, 1 Reformatory Street, Kolkata 700027, India</Affiliation>
<author>Susanta Lahiri • Moumita Maiti •Kaushik  Gangopadhyay</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-014-3922-3</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1007/s10967-014-3922-3</URL>
Abstract Total potassium content of archaeological artifacts like glass beads was determined by estimating the amount of 40K in the sample using Compton Suppression Spectroscopy which in turn unveiled the trading pattern in past through famous ancient silk route in the Bay of Bengal region. The developed technique neither involved any reactor/accelerator/X-ray source nor any chemical treat- ment of the samples. We analyzed eight different samples from Tamilnadu, India of which two samples showed ele- vated potassium content indicating their different origin. This is the first report to discriminate glass beads according to their potassium content, which ultimately helped to predict their origin.
Keywords 40K · Total potassium · Compton suppression spectroscopy · Archaeological artifacts · Glass beads
Introduction
This paper deals with a novel non-destructive radioana- lytical technique for unveiling the past with the help of archaeological artifacts. Therefore, it is necessary to understand historical context before understanding the nuclear-analytical technique.
The glass beads, used as part of personal ornamenta- tions, are important portable artifacts involved in long- distance exchange networks in which ancient societies participated. Beads are found in several cultural periods in the South Asia, from the time of the Indus valley civili- zation to the late medieval period. The Bay of Bengal region was part of the most well-known of trading net- works in antiquity known as the ‘silk-route’ that thrived between East and West [1]. The study on the composition of glass is an way to trace diffusion routes and technology transfer [1]. In the early historic period (3rd century BCE) glass beads were made in a variety of methods including winding, dipping, drawing, mould-pressing, cutting, grinding and combination of all these [2, 3]. The glass beads may be monochrome or of polychrome depending on the constituent minerals. Monochrome glass beads, classi- fied as ‘Indo-Pacific’ beads, from the Bay of Bengal region had wide-geographical extent including India, Srilanka, South-East Asia, China and Japan [3–7]. One of the important South Indian sites where plenty of glass beads have been found is Arikamedu near Pondicherry. This site was a possible manufacturing sites of glass beads. In the Bay of Bengal region, the glass beads are reported from Coromandel region and from Bengal delta sites from West Bengal, India (Chandraketugarh, Tamluk), and Bangladesh (Mahasthan and Wari Bateshwar) covering the geographi- cal zone described as Bay of Bengal interaction spheres [8]. There is ample evidence to suggest that glass object was one of the key imports in India from the Mediterranean region [9, 10].
Jackson and Smedley [11] has suggested that before 10th and 12th centuries in Northern Europe glass was made using alkali raw materials which was sodium-rich, derived either from evaporate deposits or salt-loving plants. The shift to potassium rich glasses in the middle ages was considered significant when beech wood was used as the main fuel in making potash rich glasses. Therefore, knowledge on composition of glass beads (specially its potassium content) is an important way to know the dif- fusion routes and transfer of technology through ancient silk routes. Basa et al. [2, 4, 6], based on the amount of the alkalis present, have identified two types of glass beads from South-East Asian sites, (i) potassium-rich glasses and
(ii) mixed alkali glasses. The question is where the glasses were manufactured. It has been suggested by Francis [3] and Jackson and Smedley [11] that potash rich glasses were made in the Indo-Pacific bead making sites such as Ari-  kamedu as potash glasses were unknown in the West before 1000 CE. The analysis presented by Francis [3] shows that certain glass beads from Arikamedu has a high content of potassium. Francis noted that glass beads in dark blue, purple, violet, manganese, black and probably iron black colors have potassium as their chief alkali. Only the opaque green bead has more sodium than potassium. The type of glass beads, namely, mixed alkali glasses and potassium rich glasses have high content of potassium  (5–6 %) and 15–17 % respectively [4, 6]. This discussion leads us to the conclusion that glasses with high potassium content is virtually non-existent in the West and therefore, the source of the potash rich glasses in antiquity could be India or the South-East Asia. Although, potash rich glasses are common in Han china, Basa [4] discounts the proba- bility that such early occurrence of glass beads in fourth Century BCE could have come from China.
Therefore, before the ancient glasses from the Bay of Bengal region are subject to further expensive analyses, simple screening of the glass beads from the region for potassium level could be a useful exercise, since it has been hypothesized that potassium rich glasses were produced in South India and then traded to South East Asia.
There are numbers of methods for determination of potassium including ICPOES, ICPMS, AAS, etc. [12–14]. However, all of these methods require exhaustive chemical treatment of the samples, like, digestion, dissolution, etc., which are not preferred for precious archaeological sam- ples, especially in the primary screening mode. There are of course established non-destructive techniques for determination of potassium like neutron activation analysis (NAA), particle induced X-ray emission (PIXE), energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (EDXRF), etc. However, these non-destructive techniques involve reactor or costly accelerator or at least an X-ray source.
Recently we have proposed a new analytical technique to measure the potassium content of any sample [15]. We measured the amount of 40K in samples with the help of
Compton suppressed gamma spectroscopy. The amount of 40K is fixed in nature (natural abundance 0.0117 %), it is long-lived radionuclide (T1/2 = 1.248 9 109 years with associated c-energy at 1,460 keV). Therefore by exploiting simple linear relationship between 40K and total K, we calculated total amount of K in the sample. Method was validated using NIST samples and also by one destructive technique like ICPOES and other non-destructive tech- nique like EDXRF [15]. It has been found that the pre- diction of potassium content by Compton suppressed gamma spectroscopy is closer to the certified values than the same measured by other two techniques. The method is non-destructive; therefore in this paper, we have applied this method to evaluate the potassium content of the beads collected from different regions. The samples are preserved as-it-is after the analysis.
Though numerous literatures are available on the determination of stable potassium [12–14] as well as determination of 40K by c-ray spectrometry [16–18], rarely these two have been combined. One of the reasons is that our environment can be depicted as the ocean of radioac- tivity due to the presence of 40K, which causes huge background of 40K counts during its measurement by simple gamma detectors (like, High Purity Germanium, HPGe or NaI(Tl) detectors). The count of 40K due to its presence in the sample would result hardly any increase in the total area count of 40K in the above detectors. We have demonstrated that the use of Compton suppressor system in combination with huge background shielding would decrease the background count of 40K in three to four orders of magnitude. Such huge reduction in the back- ground would be helpful to measure the amount of 40K and eventually the total amount of potassium in the sample. We have applied this method to evaluate the potassium content of the beads collected from different regions.
Experimental
Collection of samples
The samples were collected from a village Manikollai. It   is 3 km south of Perumal River in Cuddalore district, Tamilnadu, India. The site is beside the Roman Catholic School. The location of this site is within sand dunes. Thousands of glass beads, wasters and also pieces of crucibles were collected during the survey. It was evi- dently a place for manufacturing of glass beads from the early historic to the medieval period. Glass beads  were also collected from the site of Arikamedu, the particular glass bead analyzed from Arikamedu is of the Indo-  Pacific type.
Measurement of K content
At the Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, a Compton Sup- pressor System has been procured and standardized. The system is known as Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics- Compton Suppressor System (SINP-CSS). The system is consists of central detector which is a reverse electrode high  purity  Ge  (HPGe)  detector,  with  a  resolution  of
keV at 1.33 MeV. The system is surrounded by annulus detector system (9 in. 9 9 in. NaI(Tl) crystals) and four photomultiplier tubes. A 3 in. 9 3 in. NaI(Tl) plug detec- tor was  also used. The  samples  were directly placed  at   1 cm distance from the top of HPGe detector. The entire
Table 1 Performance of the Compton Suppressor System
Fig. 1 Calibration curve showing amount of potassium versus background corrected area count of 1,460 keV peak of 40K
Table 2 Measured K content in various glass beads
assembly was shielded by 10 cm thick lead with graded lining of 1 mm tin and 1.6 mm copper. The shielding had also 9.5 mm thick low carbon outer jacket. All the detec- tors, ADC (Multiport II), other electronics and Genie 2000 software were of CANBERRA made.
Different amounts of KCl were taken in sealed plastic container to avoid the background of 40K from glass con- tainers that would affect the calibration curve. The KCl was mixed with variable amount of SiO2 so that the total weight of KCl and SiO2 is 5 g. These samples (KCl ? silica) were counted with a preset time 105 s in the SINP-CSS. The cali- bration curve was drawn by taking area count of 40K photo- peak at 1,460.8 keV against the amount of potassium present in each KCl sample. Background count was subtracted from each samples/KCl count. The energy calibration of the CSS system was done with 137Cs, 60Co and 133Ba. To verify the effectiveness of CSS at 1,460.82 keV, suppressed and unsuppressed spectra of 5 g KCl were taken in a fixed geometry and improvement factors were noted (Table 1).
Results
It is observed from Fig. 1 that the total amount of K in KCl versus 1,460.8 keV photo-peak area of 40K has excellent linearity between 10 and 600 mg of K. The amounts of potassium in glass beads were measured with the help of generated calibration curve. It has been estimated that the error due to difference in geometry of the standards gen- erating the calibration curve and the samples would not exceed 10 %.
We have analysed eight different samples from Tamilnadu, India. K contents of these samples have been listed in Table 2. The K contents of six samples were in between 0.26 and 3.27 %. However, two samples,  one from Arikamedu and another from Manikollai region showed   elevated   potassium   content   *22   and   15 % respectively. The elevated potassium content clearly shows that these glass beads are from different origin and in all probability they were made in Asia.
Conclusion
The developed method demonstrates that how nuclear- analytical methods play important role not only in inter- preting data of other associated branches of sciences but also can easily penetrate and help to solve problems in humanities to recognize the development of human civili- zation from past to present. This is the first time report where the potassium content of not only glass beads but any archaeological samples has been estimated by non- destructive method. This paper also reports for the first time an attempt to discriminate glass beads according to their K content and therefore predicting the origin of the glass beads.
Acknowledgments This work has been carried out as part  of the  Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics-Department of Atomic Energy, 12th five year plan project ‘‘Trace, Ultratrace Analysis and Isotope Pro- duction (TULIP)’’. The field-work was undertaken with a project grant from the Ministry of Culture, Govt of India and hosted through the Centre for Archaeological Studies and Training, Eastern India, an autonomous Institute of the Govt. of West Bengal. One of the author (KG) also likes to thank Dr. Selva Kumar. Associate Professor Tamil University, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu and Mr. Raja Anthony for undertaking the field-work.
