<title>Thermal-hydraulic analysis of a new conceptual heat pipe cooled small nuclear reactor system</title>
<Affiliation>a.Department of Nuclear Science and Technology,  Xi'an Jiaotong University,  Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710049, China;b.Shaanxi Key Lab. of Advanced Nuclear Energy and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 710049, China</Affiliation>
<author>Chenglong Wang, Hao Sun, Simiao Tang, Wenxi Tian , Suizheng Qiu ,Guanghui Su </author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2019.06.021</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2019.06.021</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Small nuclear reactor features higher power capacity, longer operation life than conventional power sources. It could be an ideal alternative of existing power source applied for special equipment for terrestrial or underwater missions. In this paper, a 25kWe heat pipe cooled reactor power source applied for multiple use is preliminary designed. Based on the design, a thermal-hydraulic analysis code for heat pipe cooled reactor is developed to analyze steady and transient performance of the designed nuclear reactor. For reactor design, UN fuel with 65% enrichment and potassium heat pipes are adopted in the reactor core. Tungsten and LiH are adopted as radiation shield on both sides of the reactor core. The reactor is controlled by 6 control drums with B4C neutron absorbers. Thermoelectric generator (TEG) converts ﬁssion heat into electricity. Cooling water removes waste heat out of the reactor. The thermal- hydraulic characteristics of heat pipes are simulated using thermal resistance network method. Thermal parameters of steady and transient conditions, such as the temperature distribution of every key com- ponents are obtained. Then the postulated reactor accidents for heat pipe cooled reactor, including power variation, single heat pipe failure and cooling channel blockage, are analyzed and evaluated. Results show that all the designed parameters satisfy the safety requirements. This work could provide reference to the design and application of the heat pipe cooled nuclear power source.
Keywords:
Small nuclear reactor system Heat pipe cooled reactor Thermal-hydraulic characteristics Safety analysis
1.Introduction
Small nuclear power source could be applied to special equip- ment for terrestrial or underwater missions. It features compact integrated structure, high power capacity, long operation life and high system reliability and would satisfy the future demands of multi-purpose devices. Compared with the conventional chemical energy source systems, such as storage battery or fuel cell, small nuclear power source has higher energy capacity and much longer service life up to several years. Moreover, small nuclear power source has strong adaptability to various working environments. Thus it has potential market for this kind of nuclear reactor.
Nuclear energy comes from decay heat or ﬁssion heat. The former is made to isotope battery, the latter is made to nuclear reactor power source. However, only nuclear reactor power source is considered in this paper. There are three kinds of micro reactor power source classiﬁed according to coolant, such as liquid metal, gas and heat pipes. Compared with other two types of reactors, Heat Pipe cooled Reactor (HPR) has the advantages of most reliable structure, minimal reactivity control parts and well property of thermal feedback [1]. Moreover, there is no interaction between  any two of heat pipes. The LOCA and LOFA of the conventional re- actors do not occur in a HPR system. If one heat pipe is damaged, heat will be transferred by other heat pips [2]. Overall, HPR system has fewer mechanical moving parts, low noise level, less reactor mass and smaller volume. Hence it has the advantages of criticality safety, reliability and maneuverability.
Comprehensively considering the reactor mass and volume, criticality safety, reliability and maneuverability, heat pipe cooled fast reactor power source featured with compact structure, less movable parts, and low noise level could be widely adopted in the energy systems of underwater vehicles. So far the power source system for undersea vehicles (only small vehicles, large submarine is not included) are all chemical energy source, such as storage battery or fuel cell, whose operating time are from dozens to hundreds of hours, or several days. New missions, such as long time undersea scientiﬁc investigation, present higher requirements  to the undersea power system. The undersea power source should be featured with higher electrical power of hundred kilowatts, and operating time of several months or even years. The designed heat pipe cooled reactor features kilowatts electricity and lifetime of several years, meeting the future demands of undersea power source.
HPR has already been widely researched for space application, such as station and exploration. Lithium and potassium heat pipe cooled reactor system, MSR [3],is designed for Martian surface power sources featured with thermal power of 1.2MWt and elec- trical power of 120kWe. The Heat pipe-operated Mars Exploration Reactor (HOMER) [4] is designed for space station and generates electrical power by Stirling engine whose conversion efﬁciency more than 20%. Sodium heat pipe cooled reactor system, SAIRS [5], is proposed for space missions featured with alkali metal thermo- electric converter and provides 100kWe electrical power with thermoelectric conversion efﬁciency beyond 30%. HP-STMCS [6], producing 110kWe electrical power, controlled by control drums and cooled by lithium heat pipe, is operated with Thermoelectric Module Converters. Prometheus [7], a gas (He-Xe) cooled reactor system characterized by Brayton cycle and water heat pipes for its radiator, produce 400-800kWe electrical power. Several heat pipe cooled reactors designed for exploring mars surface and lunar surface are designed by China Institute of Atomic Energy, the mars surface power plant [8] and HPCMR [9]. KRUSTY, designed by NASA, is a kilowatt-class HPR with Stirling engine for space missions, and the ground testing was conducted in 2017. They also apply this kind of reactor into undersea vehicle. Up to date, small nuclear reactor power source for undersea working condition has rarely been researched theoretically and experimentally.
Based on a literature review about the design and application of HPRs, a micro nuclear reactor power source system typical of 25kWe is conceptual designed [10]. It features potassium heat pipes cooled core, reactivity-controlled drums, and thermoelectric con- version technology with conversion efﬁciency at least 5%. Based on the design, an analysis code for small heat pipe reactor is developed to analyze the performance and transient response of the designed nuclear power source. The transient parameters under accident conditions are analyzed, such as reactivity insertion, single heat pipe failure and cooling channel blockage.
2.Small HPR design
Reactor core, heat pipes, reactivity-control drums, shields, thermoelectric generator and water cooler are  conceptual designed, shown in Fig. 1. HPR is a fast reactor which can provide 0.5MWt thermal power, and its detailed structure is shown in Fig. 2. UN fuel with 65% enrichment of 235U is adopted. In this reactor, potassium heat pipes are designed for removing heat from reactor
Fig. 2. Structure of the reactor core.
core. 90 fuel rods and 37 heat pipes are arranged in a triangle array into Nb-1Zr alloy matrix which is surrounded by a barrel with Gd2O3 coating on inner surface. The barrel is located in center of 6 reactivity-control drums with 10B4C neutron absorber material. A Mo-14Re alloy vessel enfolds the above structure. Tungsten and LiH are arranged besides both sides of reactor as radiation shields. As for the electricity generation parts, heat pipes from reactor core are inserted into a copper matrix, and TEG converts heat into electricity of about 25kWe. And the water cooler is a part device of the TEG, through which the coolant ﬂows to remove the waste heat.
The power conversion system is based upon thermoelectric technology that has been applied into the spacecrafts, such as Voyager, Galileo and Ulysses [11]. The thermal electric (TE) cells of the thermoelectric conversion unit convert ﬁssion heat to elec- tricity by way of a temperature difference. The hot side temperature of thermoelectric conversion unit reaches 850K, but that in cold side is lower than 300K. Thermocouple conversion units are made of high-performance thermoelectric materials (skutterudite com- pound) [12]. The thermoelectric generator consists of copper ma- trix encasing the condenser of the heat pipe, six mutually independent thermocouple conversion units cooled by water. The hot side of the TE cell is evenly arranged on the six edges of the copper matrix. The cold junction is cooled by the water or other coolant ﬂowing over the insulating pads. Fins and bafﬂes are ar- ranged on the inner surface of cooling channel to increase the capability of heat transfer. The parameters shown in Table 1 are the system speciﬁcation.
3.Numerical modelling and method
3.1.Reactor core
As shown in Fig. 3, a multi-channels core model with fuel pins, matrix and heat pipes is established. There are 6 kinds of channels in the reactor core. The normalized power factors of channel No.1e6 are 1.24, 1.18, 1.10, 1.05, 0.95 and 0.76, obtained by Monte Carlo method [13]. A channel in active zone is deﬁned as an area including a heat pipe and part of the surrounding fuels, gaps and matrix. It is assumed that half heat generated by each fuel pin is
Fig.  1.  Structure of small nuclear reactor power source.
Table 1
Small nuclear reactor speciﬁcations.
conducted to a heat pipe. Thus only half of each fuel pin is included in one channel.
The multi-channel reactor core model is based on the solution of the energy transport equation in UN fuel, the gap, the matrix and heat pipe wall as follows. It is assumed that heat only transfers radially. The axial heat conductivity of the fuel is ignored.
@
where  r is  density  in  kg =m3,  c  is  heat  capacity  in  J =ðkg ,KÞ,  T  is temperature in K, t is time, r is radial position, l is heat conductivity in W =m$K and F is heat source. Subscript i could be UN for ﬁssion fuel, M for matrix, HPW for heat pipe wall. For FUN, it is the heat generated by ﬁssion. For other structures, the heat source gener- ated by irradiation is ignored (F 0). The boundary condition between two adjacent structures is:
@
In particular, since the detailed temperature distribution of the gap cannot be obtained by a system analysis code, there is no radial node of the gap in calculation model. Thus the gap temperature is considered to be the boundary condition between fuel and matrix in calculation, as the following equation shows:
@
where lG and dG is heat transfer coefﬁcient and thickness of the gap. The right side of the equation is the term of conductive and radi- ation heat transfer. The calculation of detailed temperature distri- bution in the gap should be conducted by coupling neutronics, thermodynamics and mechanics, and it will be done in the future work.
Point reactor kinetics model is adopted in the system analysis code to calculate the ﬁssion power of the active zone. Six groups delayed neutrons is considered in the model, as follows:
@
where  rDRUM ðtÞ is  the reactivity caused  by control  drums, while
rT   t is  reactivity  variation  caused  by temperature  feedback.  The
reactivity mentioned above is curve ﬁtted with the data obtained using Monte Carlo method, and are added in the reactor core model as the equations below:
@
where f is the angular position of control drums in degrees. When f   110:1+,rDRUM  0. Besides the ﬁssion power, the decay power is calculated with four groups of ﬁssion product considered.
3.2.Heat pipe model
Heat pipe consists of wall, porous wick and vapor core. The heat transfer between the evaporator and the condenser is considered in the heat pipe model, including the following heat resistances [14]:
(1) evaporator wall radial heat resistance; (2) evaporator  porous
wick  radial  heat  resistance;  (3)  vapor  ﬂow heat  resistance; (4) condenser porous wick radial heat resistance; (5) condenser wall radial heat resistance.
3.3.Thermoelectric generator model
As shown in Fig. 4, thermoelectric generator (TEG) is made up of thermoelectric conversion units, heat pipe condenser, cooling channel, hot and cold junction on both sides of TE units, etc. Sub-models such as thermoelectric model, heat transfer model, ﬂow model in rectangular channel, are included. Control volume method is adopted in the code. In transient analysis, the compo- nents temperature, water ﬂow rate and heat transfer are calculated.
Fig.  3.  Design  of fuel pins  and heat pipe.
Fig. 4. Structure of the TEG
Besides TE unit, heat transfer of all other components is pure heat conduction, the detailed equations are not listed here. The heat transfer equation of TE unit is:
@
Where h is the thermoelectric conversion efﬁciency, T is tem- perature, t is time, r is density, c is heat capacity, A is cross area and q is heat ﬂux. Subscript TE is thermoelectric units, hot and cold are
the hot and cold junction. Thermoelectric conversion efﬁciency is strongly associated with the TE material and operating tempera- ture, and it is calculated according to Seebeck effect, the Peltier effect and the Thomason effect [15,16,17].
The model of cooling channel is based on solution of continuity, momentum and energy function of cooling water. The boundary condition at the surface of cooling channel is:
@
where hf is the convective heat transfer coefﬁcient in rectangular channel.
3.4.Code development
In this paper, an analysis code for small heat pipe reactor is developed. This code is based on reasonable simpliﬁcation and modelling of an original designed small nuclear reactor power source. The reactor neutronics and thermal-hydraulics models, heat pipe model, TEG model and other components models such as pump and pipes are established in the code. The target parameters can be obtained by solving differential equations with the form of:
@
Gear method [18] is adopted to solve the equations in the code. This code can be used to simulate transient performance of the designed small heat pipe cooled reactor, as well as other types of HPRs. The ﬂowchart of the analysis code is shown in Fig. 5. Modular programming makes it possible redevelop the code, such as changing thermoelectric model or waste heat remove model, etc.
4.Results and discussion
4.1.Code veriﬁcation and validation
To benchmark the fully integrated system model, the code veriﬁcation and validation is necessary. The code is initially veriﬁed prior to performing a steady state analysis of the system. The calculation results of the heat pipe steam zone temperature are veriﬁed by the numerical results by using FLUENT (ZHANG Wen- wen, 2015) [19], and it can be seen in Fig. 6 that the maximum
Fig. 5. Flowchart of the analysis code.
relative error is not beyond 1%.
In addition, the model predictions are validated with the steady- state measurements for an electrically heated, fully integrated V-71 unit. The V-71 unit is the ﬁrst electrically heated ground test of a complete thermionic space nuclear power system [20,21]. For the V-71 unit, the fuel pellets were replaced by electrically heated tungsten, the thermal heat ﬂux to the emitter was assumed uni- form along the active emitter. The comparisons of the calculated and measured coolant temperatures at the core inlet and outlet are displayed in Fig. 7. The calculated values are in acceptable agree- ment with the experimental data with the maximum relative error of 8%. The difference between the calculated results and the experimental data could be caused by the uncertainty of the  coolant mass ﬂow rate. The comparison of the calculated and measured system pressure are displayed with the maximum rela- tive error is 10%, as shown in Fig. 8. The system pressure mainly affects the coolant subcooling degree,  which  is  approximately  300 K in normal operation. Hence, the maximum relative error of 10% in the local region is acceptable. Overall, the developed code is acceptable after preliminary V&V.
4.2.Steady state analysis
Fig. 9 shows the temperature distribution of the reactor system, including reactor core, heat pipe, thermoelectric units and cooling water channel. Fig. 9 can be divided into two parts. The left side shows the radial temperature distribution of the reactor core, including the average channel, the hottest and coldest channel in
Fig. 6. Code calculation results compared with the reference [25].
the active zone (No. 1 and No.6 channel as shown in Fig. 3). And the x-axis is the radial position of the core channel. For the average core channel, the fuel temperature varies from 958K-1032K. For the hottest channel, the fuel temperature peaks at 1065K, far below the melting point of UN fuel (2500K) [22]. The fuel temperature abruptly drops about 50K in the helium gap as shown in Fig. 9.
The right side shows the components temperature of thermo- electric generator, including the heat pipe condenser, the hot and cold junction and the cooling water temperature. The x-axis in the right side is the axial position of TEG unit. The temperature of heat pipe condenser is 954K at the average channel. The TE hot junction temperature is only 5K lower than the condenser (949K). The temperature sharply drops about 650K across the TE units, as shown in Fig. 10. The TE cold junction temperature varies from 296K at the cooling water inlet to 305K at the outlet. The cooling water temperature increase from the inlet of 280K to the outlet of 292K. The water is kept in liquid phase and has a large boiling margin. It means the water ﬂow has enough cooling capability to keep cold side temperature of TEG.
There is a lot of gaps among the PN junction in the TE units as shown in Fig. 4. Thus the heat resistance of TE units is hard to be simulated by a mature theoretic method. In this simulation, the TE units is assumed as homogeneous solid region, which the
Fig. 7. Comparison of calculated and measured coolant temperature of V-71 unit.
Fig. 8. Comparison of calculated and measured system pressure and coolant mass ﬂow of V-71 unit.
equivalent heat conduction is obtained from the measured exper- imental data. A one dimensional heat conduction model of TE unit is established. As shown in Fig. 10, due to the large heat resistance of the thermoelectric units, TE unit temperature varies from about 298K to 948K at the two side of the TE units.
4.3.Transient analysis
In this section, transient conditions are simulated and to eval- uate the safety performance of the designed reactor under various working conditions, including power variation, single heat pipe failure and cooling channel blockage accidents.
4.3.1.Power variation
Power variation consists of two different conditions: normal power change and accidently reactivity insertion. Power change is a normal operating condition of the reactor to adapt to the power requirements under different working status. The other case is the reactivity insertion which might occur in accident conditions. Then the control mechanism is turning the B4C absorber close to the active zone to reduce positive reactivity to zero. Then the core thermal power will correspondingly recover to the normal level. The small heat pipe cooled reactor could be used in some special operating environment, for example, the power source of undersea
Fig. 9. Temperature distribution at steady state.
Fig. 10.  Temperature of TE unit at steady state.
vehicle. In such work environment, the radiation shield layer and protective vessel of the external system might be damaged when collision or other accidents occur. Thus the water might ﬂow into the reactor core. Because water is a kind of good neutron moder- ator, it might lead to a reactivity insertion which could cause serious threats and endanger the safety of the reactor system. It is necessary to simulate this transient and evaluate the safety per- formance of the reactor core under such condition.
The water ﬂow-in accident is selected to be the analysis case. It is assumed that: 1) the reactor works at steady state before the accident occurs; 2) when the accident occurs, the helium gap in the core is suddenly ﬁlled with single-phase vapor; 3) the reactor does not shut down during the whole process. Under water ﬂow-in ac- cident, the reactivity increases by 482 pcm which is obtained using the Monte Carlo method. As the reactivity increase, thermal power increases by about 20%. Due to the control drums and the reactivity feedback effect, the core power gradually declines to the normal power level.
Fig. 11 shows the temperature variation of the reactor core and other components. The maximum fuel temperature increases to 1082K at 37s, and then gradually decreases with an decrease of thermal power. The maximum temperature of heat pipe condenser changes with the core channel temperature, reaching 963K at 38s. Due to the heat transfer among the heat pipes, tem- perature change is delayed compared to the reactor core. The maximum temperature of the hot junction of TE units reaches  955K at 85s. Because the TE unit heat resistance is large, the temperature variation of TE cold junction and cooling water is not obvious. Cooling water temperature is always far below the boiling point during the accident. Temperatures of all the components are all below the safety limits during the whole transient process. Overall, temperatures of all calculated components recover to the normal level after 200s. The designed heat pipe cooled reactor features enough safety margin. However, the water ﬂow-in acci- dent might cause other damage to the reactor core besides reac- tivity insertion, such as chemical reaction and corrosion with reactor structure alloy, the reactor is suggested to shut down when this accident occurs.
4.3.2.Single heat pipe failure
During the long term normal operation, accidental damage or collision might lead to the failures of part heat pipes. When a heat pipe fails, the heat generated in the corresponding channel cannot be effectively removed out of the active zone. The core temperature increases and it threats the reactor safety. For heat pipe cooled reactor, when a single heat pipe fails, ﬁssion heat could be trans- ferred by the adjacent heat pipes. Compared to other types of reactor, it prevents the severe damage caused by single point failure.
For the analysis of the single heat pipe failure accident, it is assumed that: 1) no other heat pipes fail and all the heat is removed by the adjacent heat pipes; 2) the heat pipe in the center of active zone with the highest operating power fails accidently; 3) the reactor does not shut down. When the calculated heat pipe fails, the heat generated by the surrounding fuel pins is removed out by the 6 heat pipes of the adjacent channels, and the power of these heat pipes in Channel 2 is 1.168 times of the normal working power. Fig. 12 shows that the maximum temperature of fuel pins, heat pipe evaporator wall and hot junction of TE units are 1089K, 964K, and 957K respectively. The reactor reaches a new steady state after 250s. The temperatures of the core and other components of the nuclear power source are far below the safety limit during the transient calculation.
4.3.3.Cooling channel blockage
Under varies working condition, the cooling water channel
Fig. 11.  Temperature variations under reactivity insertion accident.	Fig. 12. Temperature distribution under single heat pipe failure accident.
Fig. 13. Outlet temperature variations of cooling water.
might be blocked by some external bodies or be damaged in acci- dental impact or shake. Thus the cooling channel blockage accident occurs. The blockage area of cooling water could increase signiﬁ- cantly under this scenario. Cooling channel blockage accident weakens the waste heat removal capacity of the reactor, leading to a temperature increase of the system components.
The calculation cases are as follows: the blockage area of cooling water are assumed to both reduced by 50%, 80%, 90% and 99% of the original ﬂow area. The temperatures of each part of the thermo- electric generator are analyzed. Fig. 13 shows the cooling water temperature at the channel outlet. Fig. 14 shows the temperature change of TE cold junction. It can be seen obviously that blockage area is the key factor which has a great inﬂuence on the tempera- ture change under cooling channel blockage accident. When the blockage area is less than 90%, the temperature variation are small. When the blockage area is larger than 90%, the temperature of the cooling water increase signiﬁcantly. For the case that the blockage area is 99%, temperature variation of TE units is shown in Fig. 15. It shows that temperature close to the TE hot junction is higher than 900K after about 1700s. At this temperature, TE material is easy to be oxidized, weakening the electricity generation performance. Thus protective measures must be adopted, such as vacuuming or
Fig. 14. Temperature variations of TE cold junction.
Fig. 15. Temperature variation of TE unit under 99% blockage area condition.
inﬂating protective gas. Due to the high thermal resistance of TE units, the temperature change of the reactor core, heat pipes, and TE hot junction are not obvious. It is suggested that the reactor should shut down to remove the external bodies or repair the blocked water channel immediately.
5.Conclusion
In this paper, a heat pipe cooled small nuclear reactor is designed and analyzed with self-developed code. The code is based on reasonable simpliﬁcation and modelling of an original designed small nuclear reactor power source. The reactor neutronics and thermal-hydraulics models, heat pipe model, TEG model and other components models such as pump and pipes are established. The steady and transient performance of the designed heat pipe cooled reactor is evaluated. In the three calculated transient conditions (power variation, single heat pipe failure and cooling channel blockage), the temperatures of the reactor fuel and other materials are all below the safety limits. The designed reactor features enough safety margin. The following conclusions are draw as below:
1)Code veriﬁcation and validation are conducted. The numerical results agree well with the FLUENT results and experiment data from electrical heating test bench V-71. It provides the ﬁdelity and reasonability of the developed code.
2)For the steady state analysis, calculation results shows that the temperature of every component satisfy the safety requirement. The temperature of ﬁssion fuel, the matrix and heat pipes wall are far below their melting points. The working temperature of heat pipes is reasonable. The cooling water has a sufﬁcient boiling margin.
3)Under the power variation transient caused by water ﬂow-in accident, the maximum temperature of the reactor fuel rea- ches 1082K, far below the melting point of UN ﬁssion fuel. Temperature of thermoelectric generator is below the safety limits. The reactor temperature could return to the normal level after 200s. However the reactor should shut down in case of other damage.
4)Under single heat pipe failure accident, the ﬁssion heat can be removed out of the active zone by other adjacent heat pipes. The maximum fuel temperature increases by more than 50K, but  still below its melting point. The temperature will gradually reach a new steady state and the reactor could continue oper- ating without shut down.
5)The blockage area is the key factor under cooling channel blockage accident. When the blockage area is more than 90% of the ﬂow area, the temperature of part TE units increase signif- icantly to 900K that weakens the electricity generation perfor- mance due to high temperature oxidization. The reactor should shut down to remove the external bodies or repair the blocked water channel immediately.
In our future work, the demonstrated electrical heating, heat pipe cooled power source would establish in our laboratory. It would provide more experimental data for code validation. In addition, the self-developed analysis code would be improved and implemented into the CFD software to form multi-physics and multi-dimensional design and analysis platform.
Acknowledgments
Financial support for this work is China National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents (Grant No. BX201600124) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2016M600796).
