<title>Application of Additive Manufacturing for Laser Target Fabrication</title>
<Affiliation>CEA, Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives de Valduc, 21120, Is sur Tille, France/Affiliation>
<author>J. Andre, G. De Demo, K. Molina, S. Le Tacon, C. Chicanne & M. Theobald</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1406246</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1406246</URL>
Abstract — In order to produce laser targets for laser plasma experiments, the target department of Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique operates in different fields of production techniques. Additive manu- facturing becomes an important manufacturing process to match quality, delay, and cost aims. In the short term, stereo lithography seems to be the most promising technology for laser target range applications. It is a quick and, in most of the cases, accurate solution to target assembly issues. This technology allows obtaining functional assembly tools as well as parts and components compatible with laser experiment. The actual limitations are about 100 µm for tolerances and minimum wall thicknesses. A better resolution and a lower layer thickness could allow crossing these limitations.
Keywords — Additive manufacturing, laser target, plasma experiments.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
The target department of Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique produces laser targets needed for laser plasma experiments used in different experimental facilities, mostly the Laser MegaJoule (LMJ) (France) and OMEGA (Rochester, New York). Laser experiments need a wide range of target geometries with common points: reduced dimensions (couple of millimeters) and thin wall thicknesses (couple of tens of micrometers), as well as very strict dimensional and geometric specifications. According to these requirements, target specifications demand the machining of different kinds of  materials from metals (aluminum, copper, gold) to polymers and low-density foams. At the same time, the rise of experi- mental configurations and the adaptation for several experimental facilities need a production process able to provide a quick and accurate response over a wide range of geometries and target scales. To match these aims, additive manufacturing (AM) is a promising technology that
crosses technological limitations of conventional produc- tion methods and technologies (machining, electroplating, and assembling).
II.ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGIES FOR TARGET FABRICATION
The development of three-dimensional (3D) printing technologies allowed realizing complex shapes impossible (or difficult) to obtain with other means (machining, coating, electrical discharge machining) and in a short delivery time.2,3 The main difficulties for target application are the millimetric parts combined with the micrometric wall thicknesses, as well as the narrow tolerances required for the experiments.
Nowadays, metallic AM technologies (fusion of powder by laser or ion beam) don’t match these aims; typical characteristics obtained are centimetric parts with millimetric wall thicknesses and micrometer range arith- metic roughness. In the short term, polymer 3D printing technology is a more promising way according to target specifications. Two technologies are close to the target requirement: the stereo-lithography (SLA), which can produce millimetric parts with about 50- to 100-μm accuracy, and the two-photon polymerization, which allows submicron accuracy but in a limited part volume (couple of cubic millimeters). The first approach consists of evaluating the potential of the SLA technology, espe- cially for two fields: AM application for assembly operations (tooling) and AM application for target ele- ment manufacturing. All the investigations described in the following sections were made with a Project 1200  (3D   Systems)   SLA   printer   and   Visijet    Green    (3D Systems) resin. The resolution of this printer  is about 52 µm in the XY-plane (pixel size) and 30 µm in  the Z direction (layer thickness).
III.TARGET ASSEMBLY APPLICATION
The assembly process requires using specific jig  with micrometric stages for positioning and high- magnification cameras. The working area is about 1 cm3, which includes target parts, tooling, and assembly operator hand for the gluing process.
During this process, the view axis has to be preserved to guarantee alignment accuracy. This problem requires opti- mizing the tooling shape to minimize tool volume.
On the one hand, AM is a promising answer to match this aim. Figure 1 compares, for the same tooling purpose, the two technological possibilities: machined tool and 3D printed tool (Fig. 2). For an equivalent tool, dimensions of the 3D printed tool are approximately divided by 2.
On the other hand, in most of the cases, the assembly tool and support include vacuum channels to maintain the part in position during the assembly operation. Additive manufacturing allows designing complex shapes to create the vacuum channels in the monobloc tool. The cross section (Fig. 1) focuses on the internal structuration of the vacuum chambers and channels.
Fig. 1. Comparison of equivalent tool obtained by machining mean and 3D printing mean.
Fig. 2. Example of target element placed in AM tool.
This first overview of the AM, for assembly tool application, highlights that this technology allows realiz- ing efficiently (in term of cost and delay) tools with optimized size that can’t be obtained by machining process.
IV.INTEGRATION OF AM FOR TARGET PARTS FABRICATION
IV.A.Situation of AM Technology in Target Fabrication Context
In most of the cases, metallic target elements are obtained by electroplating method. As shown in Fig. 3, this method consists of several steps of machining and the addition of material by electrodeposition.
From this standard process, several developments allow diversifying the material and shape of the part produced. This process is composed of two ranges of technologies. On one hand, some processes add the selected material: physical vapor deposition (PVD) or glow discharge deposition coating for a thin layer of metal or polymer; electroplating process to obtain a couple of tens of micrometers layer of metal (gold, copper); and polymer coating (epoxy resin or polystyr- ene) for larger thicknesses. On the other hand, several processes cut them in the right shape: mechanical machining (diamond turning and milling), micro–electrical discharge machining, and laser machining. In this situation, AM can cross the limitations of each range of technologies mentioned previously by adding directly the selected mate- rial in the right shape.
In this context, AM is a promising tool to obtain target
parts as well as to develop a process combining standard processes (coating and machining) with 3D printing.
Fig. 1. Comparison of equivalent tool obtained by machining mean and 3D printing mean.
Fig. 3.  Example of standard fabrication process of metallic parts.
IV.B.Application for Protection Cone
Most of the targets require a protection cone (or disc) around the hohlraum laser entrance hole or next to the study sample to protect the diagnostic from laser beam illumina- tion. These cones require a minimum thickness of metal (typically a few micrometers of gold) to guarantee this protection. Due to quite large dimensions of these elements (about a 10-mm length and/or diameter), a minimum thick- ness of about 40 µm is needed to guarantee the mechanical stiffness required for handling this part without bending it.
The consequence of these technical limitations in terms of wall thickness is the important weight of these protections: These protections can represent from 50% to 80% of the total weight of the target assembly. Experimentally, the mass of these protections is the main contributor to the scrap gener- ated by the target during the experiment. Weight reduction of these protections is an important purpose of limiting diag- nostic and optic damages in the experience chamber.
In the example shown in Fig. 4, the cone’s mass is reduced by a factor of more than 2 by switching from a massive gold cone (40 µm thick) to  a  3D  printed  cone (180 µm thick with 5-µm gold thickness deposited by  PVD). The 3D printed cone is gold coated by magnetron sputtering in a high-vacuum chamber. This step is conditioned
by the compatibility of printing polymer or resin with vacuum (about 10–6 mbar) and the temperature reached during coating (about 100°C). In our case, sputtering of a gold layer 5 µm thick was achieved without any visible defect or dimensional variations of the 3D printed polymer. Gold coating can be realized, as required by the application, on the external or internal side of 3D printed cone according to the surface exposed during plasma discharge.
The 3D printed cones presented in Fig. 5 were used  in experiments in 2017 at the OMEGA facility in pre- paration of future LMJ campaigns.
V.DISCUSSION
Additive manufacturing is a promising answer for pro- blematic target fabrication.1 In the short term, stereo lithogra- phy seems to be the most promising technology for laser target range applications. This technology allows obtaining functional assembly tools as well as parts and components compatible with laser experiments. The actual limitations are about 100 µm for tolerances and minimum wall thicknesses. A better resolution and a lower layer thickness could allow crossing these limitations.
On the one hand, the full integration of additive fab- rication in the manufacturing process (material synthesis,
Fig. 4.  Comparison of machined/3D printed protective cone in the same experimental setup.
Fig. 5. Example of 3D printed cones: (a) before gold plating and (b) after gold plating.
machining, assembling) will require adaptation of these technologies (usually used alone). The development of common supports and modifications to a 3D printer to be able to back-print half-finished parts seems to be two key points to cross actual limitations. On the other hand, two- photon polymerization (submicron resolution) can be investigated to obtain the smallest parts, with narrow tol- erances, required for laser target applications.
