<title>Development of an advanced antineutrino detector for reactor monitoring</title>
<Affiliation>a.Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
b.Sandia Livermore National Laboratories, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
c.Atomic Energy of Canada, Limited, Chalk River Laboratories, Chalk River, ON, Canada</Affiliation>
<author>T. Classen , A. Bernstein, N.S. Bowden, B. Cabrera-Palmer, A. Ho , G. Jonkmans ,L. Kogler , D. Reyna , B. Sur </author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2014.10.022</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2014.10.022</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Here we present the development of a compact antineutrino detector for the purpose of nuclear reactor monitoring, improving upon a previously successful design. This paper will describe the design improvements of the detector which increases the antineutrino detection efﬁciency threefold over the previous effort. There are two main design improvements over previous generations of detectors for nuclear reactor monitoring: dual-ended optical readout and single volume detection mass. The dual- ended optical readout eliminates the need for ﬁducialization and increases the uniformity of the detector's optical response. The containment of the detection mass in a single active volume provides more target mass per detector footprint, a key design criteria for operating within a nuclear power plant. This technology could allow for real-time monitoring of the evolution of a nuclear reactor core, independent of reactor operator declarations of fuel inventories, and may be of interest to the safeguards community.
Keywords:
Nuclear reactor safeguards Antineutrino detection
1.Introduction
Fission reactors emit large numbers of antineutrinos and this ﬂux may be useful for the measurement of two quantities of interest for reactor safeguards [3]: reactor power and plutonium inventory throughout an operational cycle. The high antineutrino ﬂux produced by reactors allows relatively simple cubic meter scale detectors at tens of meters standoff to record hundreds or thou- sands of antineutrino events per day. Such antineutrino detectors would add online, quasi-real-time bulk material accountancy to the set of reactor monitoring tools available to safeguards agencies via a continuous, unattended and non-intrusive measurement technique. Between 2003 and 2008, a collaboration between Lawrence Liver- more National Laboratory (LLNL) and Sandia National Laboratory (SNL) successfully deployed several prototype safeguards detectors at a commercial Pressurized Light Water Reactor (PLWR) in order to test both the method and the practicality of its implementation in  the ﬁeld. In particular, the SONGS1 [4] detector performed power monitoring [2] and observed reactor fuel evolution [5] using the emitted νe ﬂux. The success of these and other efforts led the IAEA Novel Technologies Unit to convene an Experts Meeting in 2008 [10] and a Working Group Meeting in 2011 [11] to  assess  current  antineutrino  detection  technol- ogy and examine how it might be incorporated into the safeguards regime. As noted during these discussions,  detector  systems  with greater sensitivity than the initial SONGS1 prototype would provide more detailed information regarding reactor operation. However, maintaining simplicity and robustnesses are also important considera- tions, since these systems must operate unattended in the challenging environment presented by a commercial nuclear power station.
With these goals in mind, a collaboration between Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Sandia National Laboratory, and Atomic Energy of Canada Limited have constructed a detector designed for deployment at a nuclear power reactor. The detector incorporates signiﬁcant improvements in detection efﬁciency, uni- formity of response, and energy resolution compared with SONGS1. We anticipate that these technical improvements will make anti- neutrino detection technology more attractive for  safeguards,  thereby satisfying a key goal from the interim report [10]. Improving the sensitivity of the detector was not the sole focus of  effort however, as in order for this technology to be adopted by regulators or industry, it must be demonstrated to be both affordable and convenient for operators. Consequently, the design uses off-the-shelf
components where possible. Additionally,  software was  developed to automate the neutrino analysis, with little operator input.
Here we describe the design of the system, as well as its performance during laboratory testing. Through a combination of commissioning data and simulation we will demonstrate the system's capabilities as a compact νe detector, and will present a comparison to the previous SONGS1 device.
2.Detector description
2.1.Detection method
The   inverse   beta   decay   reaction   νe þp-nþeþ     is   used   to distinguish detected νe 's from most natural backgrounds. The positron–neutron pair provides a coincidence signature with a time separation  deﬁned  by  the  neutron  capture  time  in  the detection
medium. Furthermore, the kinetic energy of the prompt positron is related  to the  νe   energy by  the  relation  Ee þ ≊ Eνe  — 0:8 MeV. The
neutron  capture   time  is  determined  by   the  composition  of  the scintillator. In keeping with the goal of a practical demonstration, a readily available commercial scintillator was chosen. This detector contains BC-525 liquid scintillator [9], with a Gd loading of 0.1% by weight, giving a capture time of ~ 33 μs.
2.2.Detector features
The main detector volume consists of a 1.6 m ~ 1.6 m ~ 1.6 m scintillator volume, containing 3.6 tons of liquid scintillator (Fig. 1). The scintillator is contained within a reinforced stainless steel vessel, with a 2.54 cm air gap at the top to allow for thermal expansion and contraction of the liquid. The scintillator volume is viewed on opposing ends through 2.54 cm thick acrylic windows, sealed with teﬂon coated Viton o-rings [8]. The dual-ended readout of this detector was a key improvement over the SONGS1 design, allowing for improved light collection uniformity, resolution and position resolution. Each window is instrumented with 12 Hamamatsu R7081 PMTs [6] (10 in. diameter) to detect scintillation signals. The scintillator vessel is contained within a reinforced stainless steel buffer vessel containing mineral oil to provide hydrostatic support for the acrylic windows and optical coupling of the scintillator volume to the PMTs (Fig. 2A). A synthetic rubber lid is ﬁtted across the top of the buffer vessel to ensure that the detector is isolated from external optical photons.
The detector tank assembly is completely contained within a water shield to attenuate external background radiation.  The  water shield is composed of six interlocking stainless steel tanks providing a minimum 50 cm thickness of water shielding in all directions (Fig. 2B). Each tank is designed such that there are no line-of-sight gaps from the exterior to the  active detector volume  in order to better shield the inner detector from low energy neutrons, an important source of background.
The water shield is surrounded on ﬁve sides by a muon veto system consisting of 33 plastic scintillator panels. Each panel is instrumented with two 2 in. PMTs to achieve more uniform light collection as a function of muon interaction position. The muon veto panels on the “north”, “south” and top of the detector assembly consist  of  a  5 cm ~ 61 cm ~ 305 cm  rectangular EJ200
[12] plastic scintillator panel, with triangular light guides: this is dubbed the “ﬁsh-tail” conﬁguration. The “east” and “west” panels consist of a 5 cm thick rectangular scintillator panel observed by two PMTs on the outside face. Each PMT in this conﬁguration is
placed 1  of the panel length from the end of the panel. While this conﬁguration has worse gamma/muon discrimination than the ﬁsh-tail conﬁguration, it allows these panels to reside within the footprint of the light guides of the 3 other sides (Fig. 2C). This arrangement provides full scintillator coverage over sides exclud- ing the bottom, and maintains a compact system footprint. The thickness of the panels gives a clear separation between the muon signals and natural gamma background (Fig. 3) to reduce muon rejection related dead time, while maintaining high muon rejec- tion efﬁciency.
2.3.Data acquisition system
The data acquisition system (Fig. 4) is composed of ﬂexible, commercially available components (Table 1). After high voltage decoupling, the PMT signal is passed through  a  low  pass  LC  ﬁlter network to ensure that the narrow single photo-electron response covers several samples of the waveform  digitizers (WFDs) used downstream. After shaping, a CAEN V795 Fast ampliﬁer  provides  10  gain  and  signal  fan  out  to   Struck SIS3320 WFDs (operated at 200 MHz) and CAEN V812 Constant Fraction Discriminators (CFDs). The Struck SIS3320 waveform digitizers were used to capture integrated  PMT  event  charges  and baselines. SIS3320 ﬁrmware that provided gated integrals was used for data reduction, two gates were deﬁned to capture the waveform pedestal and signal. All SIS3320 WFDs are synchronized to a single Struck SIS3820 clock, and the data is transferred to the
Fig. 1. Two schematic views of the detector, including the inner detector and buffer vessel. All measurements are in mm.
Fig. 2. (A) The instrumented scintillator vessel being lowered into the buffer vessel. (B) The buffer vessel partially surrounded by the water shielding tanks. (C) The completed detector with external muon veto system.
Fig. 3. The ADC spectra from a “ﬁsh-tail” and “east/west” muon panel. The vertical dashed lines represent the threshold for gamma muon separation.
data acquisition computers by USB through a Struck SIS3150 VME/ USB interface. A multiplicity trigger was implemented externally by applying a CAEN V812 discriminator to the inner detector PMT signals, and then feeding the discriminated signals into a CAEN V1495 general purpose FPGA module. The V1495 FPGA was programmed to perform a multiplicity trigger and to issue trigger signals to the individual SIS3320 WFD modules. This allows for triggering on a coincidence of any 8 of the 24 inner detector PMTs which are connected to three SIS3320 WFD modules. The remain- ing SIS3320 WFD modules are asynchronously triggered to record muon signals. The entire DAQ system ﬁts inside of a single VME crate, which along with the high voltage supply and two compu- ters for onboard analysis and data storage ﬁt inside of a single climate controlled rack.
Fig. 4. Schematic of the data acquisition system.
3.Simulation
A Geant4 [1] based simulation tool was speciﬁcally developed for this system. The simulation tool contains all detector compo- nents, and the ability to run the simulation with a complete detector, or each component individually. This allows the simula- tion to recreate both the fully deployed detector and the various partially constructed test phases. The simulation is able to simu- late calibration sources, backgrounds, as well as the antineutrino spectra for 235U, 239Pu, 238U and 241Pu. The ﬁssion isotopes can be combined with different proportions to simulate the antineutrino spectrum during all stages of a reactor cycle. The simulation performed full optical transport and applied a PMT photocathode response function to fully model the detector up to generation of
Table 1
Data acquisition system.
Fig. 5. (a) Background data reconstructed Y vs X positions. (b) Simulation data reconstructed Y vs X positions. The main features, hotter corners with a uniform central region, are observed in both cases.
Fig. 6. (a) The reconstructed Z positions of events compared to their true positions from a Geant4 simulation. (b) The reconstructed Y positions of events compared to their true positions from a Geant4 simulation. The X and Y dimensions are analogous in this analysis.
photoelectrons at the photocathode. The optical reﬂectance and scintillation properties of the simulation materials were tuned such that the simulated response qualitatively matched the test data from the detector (Fig. 5).
The PMT arrays on each end of the detector are referred to as “north” and “south”. The natural log of the  ratio  of  the  north PMTs response to the south PMTs provides an estimate of the Z position of events within the detector (Fig. 6a). This estimator breaks down near the acrylic windows where shadowing of PMTs at large angles by mu-metal shields results in a disproportionate fraction of the light produced being detected on the opposite side of the detector. The Z position inference is therefore biased  towards that opposite end.  Conversely,  events  occurring  near  the acrylic but in front of a PMT face result in that PMT receiving   a disproportionately large percentage of the light, causing a misreconstruction of the inferred Z position beyond the actual extent of the detector.
The X and Y position of events can be inferred through a charge weighted position average along the respective axes, albeit less
accurately than the Z position (Fig. 6b). Features in these distributions are due to the mu-metal shields, and the optical limitations of the dual-ended readout. The falloff in reconstruction ability near the edges of the detector is a simple limitation of using charge sharing, as even events happening at the detector edge will have some light detected in PMTs on the opposite edge, pulling these events towards the center of the detector. The majority of the reconstruction issues are caused by the 5 cm proximity of the PMTs to the scintillator volume.
There are several lessons learned from studies of position reconstruction within this detector. It is preferable to leave some separation between the PMT's and the active volume to minimize reconstruction anomalies. However, this reduces the total detector volume. Additionally, PMT timing could be used to improve the position reconstruction, particularly near the edges of the detector where the charge-sharing method falters. Upgrading the DAQ with waveform digitizers that operate at a higher sampling rate would allow for this type of improvement.
Fig. 7. The Single Photoelectron (SPE) spectrum from one inner detector PMT.
Fig. 8. Fitting the 228Th spectrum after background subtraction allows for calibra- tion of the detector's energy response, as well as measurement of the detector's energy resolution.
4.Calibration
4.1.LED calibration
An LED is located at the center of each PMT array, which may be externally triggered in coincidence with a forced DAQ trigger. The PMT gains are then extracted from the resulting single photoelec- tron (SPE) spectra (Fig. 7). The high voltage applied to the inner detector PMTs was tuned for identical SPE response. The DAQ software was written such that physics  data would  be  taken  in  24 h blocks, with short LED calibration runs taken between blocks to track PMT gain stability.
4.2.Source calibration
Calibrations of the inner detector were taken using 252Cf and 228Th (Fig. 8) sources placed on the exterior of the  buffer  tank  wall. Since the system was designed to run autonomously once installed, the design did not allow for internal deployment of radioactive sources. Natural background sources such as neutron capture from spallation, and natural gamma peaks would be analyzed for calibration once deployed. An automated calibration system would be a useful upgrade for future designs, but did not  ﬁt into the scope of this project.
Analyses  of  the  2.6 MeV  gamma  ray  peak  from  228Th, the
2.2 MeV gamma ray peak from neutron capture on hydrogen, and the ~ 8.5 MeV shoulder from the neutron capture on Gd show
Table 2
Detection efﬁciency comparison between SONGS1 and the system described here.
a  consistent  energy  resolution  of  20%=pﬃEﬃﬃ,  where  E  is  the  recon-structed energy in units of MeV. The hydrogen and gadolinium neutron capture peaks were measured using a 252Cf calibration source and spallation neutrons produced by cosmic muon inter- actions in the detector and its surroundings. 252Cf calibration data was collected using a sealed source placed at the edge of the detector tank. A statistical background subtraction allowed the isolation of the neutron capture response [13]. A similar response spectrum for spallation neutrons was isolated by requiring events
in the neutron capture energy range to occur within 100 μs of each
other. The energy resolution and response of the detector is unlikely to be sufﬁcient to perform an unfolding of the reactor antineutrino energy spectrum, allowing inference of a reactor's isotopic ﬁssion fractions. However, it could be used to verify the broad shift in spectrum expected to occur as PWR fuel evolves as in [7], and would clearly be suitable for rate-only reactor monitor- ing measurements of the sort demonstrated with SONGS1 [2].
5.Analysis
The dual-ended optical readout of this device allows for an improved event selection efﬁciency of 39.2% compared to the previous SONGS1 detector's 11.8% (Table 2). One example of this is the position reconstruction capabilities of the detector, which are evident when analyzing the calibration data. By performing back- ground subtraction of the position distributions of source data, it becomes clear that the events are localized spatially (Fig. 9).
Additionally, by taking the geometric mean of the north and south PMTs it is possible to correct for light attenuation and other
propagation losses, giving a more uniform energy response. The energy resolution of the detector is improved by 15% to 20%=pE
using this technique. The resolution of the detector could be
improved signiﬁcantly by a detailed series of calibrations at various positions within the detector to map the position dependence of this response, although such an effort was not completed here. The position dependence of the energy response was further studied by examining the simulated response to uniformly distributed mono- energetic positrons (Fig. 10). The resolution of a central region containing 12% of the active volume, compared to the entire active volume, is a factor of two better in this example, although some part of that gain is due to the improved likelihood of capturing the positron's annihilation gamma's in the central region.
The detector has no particle identiﬁcation capabilities, e.g. via pulse shape discrimination, so selection of antineutrino interactions relies on measuring the time between, and energy of, events. By examining the interval between events in the neutron capture energy range, it is possible to simultaneously ﬁt the neutron capture time constant and accidental coincidence rates [4]. Spallation neu- trons were used to measure the neutron capture time in the scintillator, as they provide an abundant correlated neutron capture Fig. 9. The background-subtracted position distributions of events from a 228 Th source placed on the exterior of the buffer tank. For this calibration, the source was placed on a wall in the YZ plane.
Fig. 9. The background-subtracted position distributions of events from a 228 Th source placed on the exterior of the buffer tank. For this calibration, the source was placed on a wall in the YZ plane.
Fig. 10. The reconstructed energy spectrum for simulated 3.0 MeV positrons in the whole detector and a central region, including annihilation gamma rays.
Fig. 11. Inter-event time for background events.
signal at the Earth's surface. A ﬁt to the inter-event time distribution (Fig. 11) of background data gives a neutron capture time of 33 μs,
and an accidental coincidence rate consistent with the uncorrelated background.
To demonstrate the ability of this instrument as a νe detector, we
estimate the efﬁciency of the various components of the total νe detection efﬁciency and perform a comparison with that obtained during  the  previous  SONGS1  demonstration  (Table  2).  Some Fig. 12. Neutron capture energy response from multiple neutron capture due to spallation. The difference between the energy response at the short (solid black) and long (dashed black) inter-event times is due to the neutron capture response (hatched). The difference of these yields the neutron capture response (blue). For comparison, the SONGS neutron capture response is also shown (red). The inset shows this detectors neutron capture spectrum within a central detector region, illustrating full capture of the Gd neutron capture cascade. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure caption, the reader is referred to the web version of this paper.)
components, such as the muon veto efﬁciency, were not calculable, as they depend heavily on the speciﬁc background and signal rates at a deployment site, so these values were not considered here.
5.1.Positron efﬁciency
The positron detection efﬁciency is most strongly affected  by the analysis threshold applied to the ﬁrst event in a correlated pair. For the sake of comparison we assume the same threshold as used in the SONGS1 demonstration of 2.39 MeV. In fact it may be possible to lower this threshold, and therefore increase this efﬁciency, if it could be shown that additional cuts, such as inter-event distance (Fig. 13), prove to be effective against random coincidence backgrounds. However such analyses must be made after deployment, when the actual background conditions are known. Therefore, in the comparison performed here, the  only  area in which this detector bests SONGS1 is a higher percentage of captured annihilation gamma rays. The gains however are meager, giving a positron detection efﬁciency of 6076%.
In order to estimate the positron efﬁciency, as well as its error, we must estimate the error on the energy scale of the detector. This was done by ﬁrst calculating the effect on the positron energy reconstruction of ignoring scintillator quenching when performing Fig. 13. The event separation metric for simulation and data. Both simulation and data show the random coincidence distribution that peaks at larger separation. Additionally the event separation for events in the correlated data sample shown in Fig. 11 (a mixture of correlated signals and random coincidences) and simulation of inverse-beta decay events are shown.
the gamma energy calibration. The non-linearity of the gamma ray calibration points available was calculated for a range of quenching parameters reasonable for scintillators of this type. The quenched parameters were linearly ﬁt to extract a calibration constant, which was applied to the positron energy scale. The difference between the linearly calibrated positron energies and positron energies with the quenching function applied was calculated, and the maximum difference of 4% was taken as the non-linearity component of the energy scale error. This value was added in quadrature to the ﬁt error on the gamma calibration data for a total energy scale error of 5%.
The positron spectrum obtained from the beta decay of ﬁssion fragments for a reactor core at equilibrium was simulated to estimate the positron efﬁciency. The positron efﬁciency error was estimated by simulating one million random thresholds from a Gaussian  distribution  peaked  at  2.39 MeV,  with  a  width  of  5%
(0.12 MeV). The integral of the reactor νe   positron energy spectrum
was calculated above these thresholds with the results tabulated in a histogram. This histogram was ﬁt with a Gaussian distribution, with the centroid of the distribution at 60% giving the positron efﬁciency, and the width of 5% giving the error on the efﬁciency.
5.2.Neutron efﬁciency
Though there is a small gain in positron efﬁciency, signiﬁcant gains were achieved in neutron detection efﬁciency. A spectrum taken from the accidental only portion of the inter-event time range can be subtracted from a spectrum in the neutron capture range to extract the neutron capture energy spectrum (Fig. 12). The acci- dental time range is calculated so as to contain an equal number of accidental background coincidences as the time interval in the neutron capture signal region. The Gd capture full energy shoulder (8.5 MeV) and neutron capture on hydrogen (2.2 MeV) are clearly visible. The Gd shoulder is more distinct in this detector than in SONGS1, and the hydrogen capture peak is clearly visible. For a direct comparison to the SONGS1 detector, setting the neutron capture threshold at the SONGS1 value of 3.5 MeV gives an efﬁciency of 69%. A conservative error of 5% is obtained by shifting the neutron capture cut by the energy resolution of the detector and observing the change in efﬁciency. Thus the detector maintains excellent neutron identiﬁcation efﬁciency above a signiﬁcant por- tion of the natural gamma ray background. The inset of Fig. 12 shows the neutron capture energy spectrum, with a position cut restricting events to the central portion of the detector. Though the position reconstruction is uncalibrated, this clearly demonstrates that full containment of the Gd neutron capture gamma ray shower is occurring in the detector for a subset of events, driving the major improvement to the neutron detection efﬁciency over SONGS1.
5.3. DAQ live time
The SIS3320 WFDs are conﬁgured with a dual bank event buffer, so there is no dead time associated with data readout of the system at the ~1 kHz event rates encountered during commis-
sioning and expected during system deployments. A 2 μs trigger
delay between events results in the only DAQ dead time. The unshielded background rate with no overburden in the laboratory test area was 3000 Hz, resulting in a DAQ dead time of 0.6%. Once the shield was added,the background trigger rate was reduced to 50% of  the  unshielded value, for a maximum  trigger dead  time of 50% of  the  unshielded value, for a maximum  trigger dead  time of 0.3%. The trigger dead time is highly dependent on the speciﬁc deployment site characteristics, but the laboratory test area represents a worst case scenario, and the dead time at any site is expected to be below the unshielded location with no overburden. This yields a minimum trigger efﬁciency of 99.7 70.3%.
5.4.Minimum Δ t
The neutron capture timing efﬁciency was calculated by integrat- ing over the sum of two exponential functions e — t=33:3 — e — t=1:5 where 33 μs is  the  measured  neutron  capture  time,  and  e1:5  μs  is  an  approximate   representation  of  the  neutron  thermalization  time
that matches the shape in the measured Gd capture timing data  at low inter-event time. The efﬁciency was  calculated  by  integrating  this formula from 2 to 100 μs, and dividing by the total integral of the
function to give a value of 95%. The error on this value was estimated by evaluating the same formula with neutron capture  times  altered by the measured neutron capture time error yielding 0.9%.
5.5.Fiducial volume
The dual ended readout of the detector ensures that all events generated within the detector are visible to at least half of the PMTs. Thus the full ﬁducial volume may be used, in contrast to the SONGS1 detector. The ability to calculate an inter-event position metric however (Fig. 13) means that an additional data cut could  be used instead of a ﬁducial volume. Since the inverse-beta decay positron and neutron are produced in the same position, they will be detected with a small inter-event distance. Accidental back- ground however will have inter-event distances spanning all distances allowed by the detector. Analysis of simulation data shows that cutting on this parameter would cut the accidental background rate in half, while maintaining 99% efﬁciency for detectable inverse beta decay events. A more aggressive cut would remove 75% of accidental backgrounds while maintaining a 95% efﬁciency for detectable inverse beta decay events. These cuts are ineffective for natural correlated backgrounds. As stated above, any decision to use such an analysis must be informed by  the actual site background spectrum.
5.6.Total efﬁciency
A simple Monte Carlo simulation was used to estimate the total detector efﬁciency and error from the individual components. Each component was represented in the simulation as a Gaussian distribution peaking at the component efﬁciency, with a width of the component efﬁciency error. Random values were chosen from each Gaussian distribution for one million fake experiments, and multiplied to calculate each experiments total efﬁciency. The total efﬁciencies were recorded in a histogram, which ﬁt well to a   Gaussian distribution. The mean of this ﬁt was taken as the total detector efﬁciency, and the width was taken as the error on the  total efﬁciency. The combination of the many improvements made in this detector design results in a total detection efﬁciency three times greater than SONGS1.
The deployed footprint of this detector, including the water shield and muon veto system, is 10 m2, compared to 6 m2 for the SONGS1 device. Within this footprint, the current design contains
3.6 tons of target mass with a detection efﬁciency of 39.2%,  whereas the SONGS1 device obtained only 0.64 tons of  target  mass at 11.8% detection efﬁciency. If the two systems were deployed in the same location at a reactor complex, the current design would observe a factor of 18.7 more νe . Alternately, this detector could be deployed at 4.3 times the distance from the reactor core  as SONGS1,  and have  identical  performance,  signiﬁ-
cantly increasing the likelihood of ﬁnding a suitable deployment position within an existing power plant.
A simulation was developed to generate expected datasets for this detector in the original SONGS1 deployment location during a reactor shut down. For this simulation, a conservative signal to background ratio of 1 was used as a worst-case extrapolation of the SONGS1 background. Additionally, the neutrino ﬂux decayed with a 15 min time constant after shutdown to simulate continued beta decay within the fuel elements. Applying the sequential prob- ability ratio test as in [2], the reactor shutdown is detected within 90 min for 99.5% of 1 million simulated datasets, with a mean detection time of 49 min. This compares favorably to the 300 min detection time from SONGS1, though it must be stressed that this analysis depends heavily on assumed background conditions, whereas the SONGS1 analysis used actual data.
6.Conclusion
An advanced antineutrino detector for nuclear reactor mon- itoring has been designed and constructed. The detector design features more detection mass per footprint, dual-ended readout, and enhanced shielding/muon rejection compared to previous systems. An antineutrino detection efﬁciency of 39.2% has been estimated for this system from extensive testing. Additional improvements for background shielding and rejection have been tested, including a modular water shield, and a thick plastic muon rejection system. The signiﬁcant improvements to the detector efﬁciency result in improved deployability, as well as reactor monitoring ability. The detection system is complete, and cur- rently  available  for  deployment,  if  a  suitable  reactor  site  can be found.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Ofﬁce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Research and Development.
This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC5-07NA27344. LLNL-JRNL-655279.
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory managed and operated by Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the U.S. Depart- ment of Energy National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000. SAND2014-15109O.
