<title>In-depth analysis of international collaboration and inter-institutional collaboration in nuclear science and technology during 2006–2015</title>
<author>Hui-Zhen Fu, Jian Chu & Ming Zhang</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Department of Information Resources Management, School of Public Aﬀairs, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China; b.Institute of Materials, China Academy of Engineering Physics, Mianyang, Sichuan, China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1383209</DOI>
<URL> http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2017.1383209</URL>
ABSTRACT
Nuclear science and technology (NST) is a promising but dangerous field, and the collabora- tion patterns were cautiously encouraged to promote this field. An in-depth analysis was con- ducted to reveal overall trends, collaboration patterns, citation impact, and collaboration net- works in NST category of the Science Citation Index Expanded. Newly developed indicators of
TCyear, CPPyear, SNI, and CPPSNI were employed for the concrete analysis. Fruchterman Rheingold default layout algorithm in Gephi 0.9.1, a data visualization and manipulation software, was also used to visualize the network and relationships of collaboration among countries, and institu- tions. Results show that the leading institutions and countries involve more inter-institutional and
international collaborations. The USA and European countries were important centers of global international collaboration network, while Iran was isolated from the international community. National Institute for Nuclear Physics from Italy and Japan Atom Energy Agency were two cen- ters of inter-institutional collaboration network. International collaboration improved scientific impact of almost all countries in NST field. Moreover, a close relationship between one country’s scientific papers and nuclear power stations was revealed. This study originally revealed the col- laboration patterns and impact of NST during 2006–2015, and provided important information and prior collaborators for researchers and policy-makers.
KEYWORDS
Collaboration pattern; nuclear science and technology; nuclear data; collaboration networks; SCI-EXPANDED
1.Introduction
Collaboration has been strongly intensified in recent decades owing to rapid development in scientific com- munication [1]. International collaboration is becom- ing increasingly important for the advancement of sci- ence [2,3]. It was observed that the number of received citations for internationally co-authored papers is con- siderably higher than for single-country ones, and even more than twice as high as for single-institution papers [4]. Collaboration leads to higher citation impact in practically most science areas, including eight major fields of clinical medicine, biomedical research, biol- ogy, chemistry, physics, mathematics, engineering, and earth and space sciences [5], and all papers indexed in the Science Citation Index (SCI) during 1980–2000 [6]. Certain countries have different performances on the citation impact of collaboration. Almost none benefit resulting from collaboration with Iran [7]. American scientists publishing in Nature and Science do not ben- efit from international collaboration [8]. Different dis- ciplines and different countries have their own collabo- rative characteristics. An attempt was made to explore whether the non-mainstream science area of nuclear science and technology (NST) is similar with most sci- entific areas, and what are the collaborative patterns of it.
NST, as a symbol of national strength, involves multi- disciplines, multi-institutions and multi-countries, and is a very special field with several distinctive charac- teristics. First, NST has a long history,  which could   be dated back to 1900s [9], and is now  promising with great potential of development in the future. The world will need greatly increased energy supply in the next 20 years, especially cleanly generated electricity. Nuclear power, the most environmentally benign way of producing electricity on a large scale, provides about 11% of the world’s electricity,  and  21%  of  electric- ity in OECD countries [10]. Second, NST has been  involved in various fields for decades, for example, geol- ogy [11], nutrition [12], and nuclear medicine [13]. Moreover, due to danger of NST, safety is an impor- tant factor needed to be paid wide attention [14]. Cer- tain information related to NST which was involved in secret-involved information system was restrictedly communicated. Therefore, collaboration was cautiously encouraged and was restrictedly conducted to promote the development of NST. The collaboration patterns of the global NST field could supplement fresh informa- tion to the exited collaboration patterns of scientific community, but stay unclear.
Concretely, to characterize the collaborative pat- terns and compare the citation impact of international and inter-institutional collaboration in NST field, some newly developed indicators were employed. The indica- tor of total citations (TC) has been traditionally applied to evaluate research for decades [7,15]; however, the indicator of total citations could not be reexamined due to the regular update of Web of Science [16]. A newly developed indicator TCyear [17,18] was introduced to overcome the limitations of the traditional citation indi- cator [16]. The citations per publication (CPP) has been used as a citation indicator [19]. To understand the col- laboration patterns, a proportion of single-institution articles:nationally collaborative articles:internationally collaborative articles (SNI) has been recently proposed to describe institutions characteristics [20]. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in using data mining and information retrieval for the scientomet- ric analysis of collaboration networks with the purpose of revealing possible patterns of collaborative behavior between contributors. Gephi is an interactive visualiza- tion and exploration platform for all kinds of networks and complex systems, dynamic and hierarchical graphs [21], and has been recently developed to reveal interac- tive visualization based on co-authorship [22], and rela- tionship among institutes [23].
In general, newly developed indicators including CPPyear, SNI, CPPSNI, and software Gephi 0.9.1 were employed to obtain accurate, rich, and fresh infor- mation of collaboration characteristics of Web of Sci- ence category of NST. This study with big data not  only revealed overall trends, active countries, and insti- tutions in NST field, but also identified the citation impact, and collaboration networks’ international col- laboration, inter-institutional collaboration, to help sci- entific researchers seek for experience and potential col- laboration partners, to provide useful information and guidance for researchers and policy-makers. Moreover, the collaboration patterns of international and inter- institutional collaboration were examined, supplement- ing fresh and thorough collaboration characteristics of the special field NST to the exited collaboration patterns of scientific community.
2.Data source and methodology
2.1.Data source
The analysis provided in this study is based on the Science Citation Index Expanded (SCI-EXPANDED) database of Web of Science from Thomson Reuters (updated on 10 April 2016). According to Journal Cita- tion Reports (JCR) of 2014, it indexes 8618 journals with citation references across 176 Web of Science cate- gories in science edition. There are 34 journals listed in the category of NST in JCR in 2014 [24]. These 34 jour- nals included International Journal of Energy Research, Journal of Nuclear Materials, Journal of Radiological Protection, International Journal of Radiation Biology, Radiation Physics and Chemistry, IEEE Transactions on
Nuclear Science, Health Physics, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A-Accelerators Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equipment, Radiation Measurements, Fusion Engineering and Design, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, Progress in Nuclear Energy, Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, Radiochimica ACTA, Journal of Fusion Energy, Annals of Nuclear Energy, Nuclear Engineering and Design, Radiation Pro- tection Dosimetry, Nuclear Engineering and Technol- ogy, Nuclear Technology, Nuclear Science and Engineer- ing, Science and Technology of Nuclear Installations, Nuclear Technology & Radiation Protection, Radiopro- tection, Radiation Effects and Defects in Solids, Fusion Science and Technology, Nuclear Science and Techniques, Kerntechnik, Problems of Atomic Science and Technol- ogy, Atomic Energy, Nuclear Engineering International, and ATW-International Journal for Nuclear Power. NST covers resources on nuclear energy (fission and fusion processes), nuclear energy and fuel, nuclear power, and nuclear electric power generation. This category also includes resources on nuclear engineering (the branch of technology that applies the nuclear fission process to power generation), nuclear safety, radiation effects, and radioactive waste management [24]. A total of 93,440 publications from 2006 to 2015 were found in NST cat- egory in SCI-EXPANDED. An article which contains a description of complete research and results [25] is the most common document type, with 88,692 of such arti- cles (95%). A total of 88,692 articles were retrieved as for further analysis.
2.2.Indicators
The indicators calculated on academic NST articles and abbreviations are given in Table 1 together with their denotation, definition and calculation. Publica- tion output indicators (including number of different kinds of publications, publication share, and SNI)  and citation indicators (including number of total citations and citations per publication, CPPSNI) were mainly used, and some other indicators (including actual value related to reactors) were also employed. TC2015 was used to replace the traditional dominator of total citations, and produced a new indicator CPP2015. Concretely, TC2015 and CPP2015 having the advantage of repeatability were used to characterize the citation impact of collaboration. A new indicator, CPPSNI, derived from SNI [20], was proposed to describe the CPP2015 ratio of multi-countries articles, domestic  and international multi-institution articles, which was intuitive and informative.
According to the actual situation, articles originating from England, Scotland, Northern Ireland, and Wales were classified as being from the United Kingdom (UK)
Table . Introduction of the bibliometric indicators and abbreviations used in subsequent analysis.
[26]. The contributions from institutions and countries were identified by the appearance of at least one author in the publications. Collaboration type was determined by the affiliations of the authors. Four types of arti- cles were introduced for the evaluation of countries and institutions [26]. (1) The term ‘single coun- try/institution article’ was assigned if the researchers’ affiliations were from the same country/institution.
(2) The term ‘multi-country/institution article’ was designated to those  articles  that  were  coauthored  by researchers from multiple countries/institutions. Multi-country and multi-institution article terms were used for the analysis of international collaboration and inter-institutional collaboration, respectively.
2.3.Fruchterman Rheingold layout algorithm
Gephi 0.9.1 was employed to analyze the collaboration networks of authors, institutions, and countries in this study. One of its key features is the ability to display the spatialization process, aiming at transforming the
network into a map, and Fruchterman Rheingold is its default layout algorithm [27]. Fruchterman and Rhein- gold have two principles for graph drawing: (1) vertices connected by an edge should be drawn near each other, and (2) vertices should not be drawn too close to each other. They applied unrealistic forces in an unrealis- tic manner, and made only vertices that are neighbors attract each other, but all vertices repel each other [28]. A graph G = (N, E) is a set N of nodes and a set E of edges, in which an edge joins a pair of nodes [28]. A node is a term used in Gephi to identify the record ID and label of a particular item in a set of data. Central- ity measures are indicators that characterize the impor- tance of individual nodes. One of the most important ones is betweenness centrality, referred to as rank pres- tige by Wasserman and Faust [29]. Betweenness central- ity measures the nodes’ ability as the media, that is, the ability of occupying the other two nodes on the short- est path between others and therefore has a potential for control of collaboration [30].
Figure . Annual production and CPP of multi-country, domestic multi-institution, and single-institution articles.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Overall development of collaboration pattern
... Trends of collaboration patterns
To understand overall development of NST field, Figure 1 shows the annual production and impact citations of multi-country (CPPMP), domestic multi- institution (CPPDMP), and single-institution articles (CPPSP), which was calculated by TC2015/TP, described in Table 1. Unlike most scientific areas with increas- ing trends of publication outputs in twenty-first cen- tury [31–33], NST field remained stable without a clear upward trend during 2006–2015. A linear model could describe the relationship between the annual cumula- tive number of articles and the year published from 2006 to 2015, with a high coefficient of determination (0.9993). The linear fitting curves for NST research was found to be: Y = 8946X − 1569, where Y is the cumu- lative number of articles and X is the number of years since 2006. This indicated that nowadays NST field has stayed a stable platform stage of development, which is not common in today’s scientific activity. NST field was one of a few controversial fields which was some- times strongly opposed to being studied and developed due to some political and secure reasons. Although global science and engineering research publications were increasingly collaborative as well as increasingly international in authorship [1], the domestic inter- institutional collaboration and international collabora- tion in NST field also remained stable during the past decade. The international collaboration rate fluctuated from 23% in 2006 to 25% in 2015, without obvious  change. The domestic inter-institutional collaboration rate slightly rose from 32% in 2006 to 37% in 2015, while
the percentage of single-institution articles declined from 45% in 2006 to 39% in 2015. The SNI of single- institution articles, domestic multi-institution articles, and multi-country articles changed from 45:32:23 in 2006 to 39:37:25 in 2015. In general, the production and collaboration pattern remained stable during 2006– 2015. The single-institution article is the major compo- nent, and then domestic multi-institution article, and multi-country article.
... Trends of citation impact
The CPPs of multi-country, domestic multi-institution, and single-institution articles all had decreasing trends from 2006 to 2015 (Figure 1). Three kinds of CPPs,
i.e. CPPMP, CPPDPM, and CPPSP, all decreased from 2006 to 2015 due to the time needed for accumula- tion of citations [34]. The CPPSNI of single-institution articles, domestic multi-institution articles, and multi- country articles changed a little from 1:1.10:1.51 in 2006 to 1:1.16:1.50 in 2015, with the average of 1:1.14:1.52. Apparently, the articles involved in international collab- oration have the highest CPP2015 in the whole investiga- tion period, followed by the articles with domestic inter- institutional collaboration, and the articles without any inter-institutional collaboration. One article which was published by international collaboration was tended to attract one and a half times than the article without any inter-institutional collaboration. Broader collabo- ration was made, more citations the publications would receive.
3.2.International collaboration
... National contributors
National contributors were important actors in sci- entific activities. The 20 most productive countries were listed with number of publications, citations per publication, and number of nuclear reactors in Table 2. The leading USA took one-fifth of total NST articles, followed by Japan and Germany. Nuclear power, as one of the most popular application of NST, is the most environmentally benign way of producing electricity on a large scale [10]. Nuclear power stations now operate in 30 countries. According to International Atomic Energy Agency [35], there are 444 operational and long-term shutdown reactors in 30 countries (Table 2). Relationship between total number of articles (TPall) and number of operational and long-term shutdown reactors (TRO&LTS) was tested by Pearson correlation of coefficient, which was calculated as 0.89. This indi- cated that there is a close relationship between one  country’s scientific papers and nuclear power stations. More power stations usually lead to more scientific studies. Great demand on nuclear power stimulates the development of NST field, because various scientific studies covering the selection of sites for a nuclear power station [36], the treatment of radioactive waste
Table . Number of publications and citations per publication of  most productive countries.
[37], transient identification [38], tungsten materials for nuclear fusion [39] and so forth were needed to solve the problems in actual applications. Moreover, the ITER project could partly explain the order of top countries. ITER is one of the most ambitious energy projects in the world today, and the ITER Members – China, the European Union, India, Japan, Korea, Russia and the United States – are now engaged in a 35-year collaboration to build and operate the ITER experi- mental device, and together bring fusion to the point where a demonstration fusion reactor can be designed (https://www.iter.org/proj/inafewlines). It is uncom- mon that Iran was ranked in the top 20 countries in a certain field, which might because Iran is the seventh country to produce uranium hexafluoride (or UF6),   a substance required in the nuclear enrichment pro- cess (http://www.iranreview.org/content/Documents/ Iran_Ranks_Seventh_among_Countries_Producing_ UF6.htm). Iran also gives national priority to its nuclear program, adopt national nuclear policy, and pursue such an inflexible position despite all its costs [40].
To understand the publication trends of the top eight countries, the annual production of them were revealed in Figure 2. Each country has its own cycle from 2006 to 2015. Undoubtedly, the USA stood in  the first place, having a cycle with the greatest radial. The cycle-shapes of the other seven countries except China were similar to each other with different radials, indicating stable development for most countries dur- ing 2006–2015. China was at the bottom of these eight countries in 2006, but increased sharply after 2010, and became the second in 2015. China are pursuing ambitious expansions of their nuclear power capacities, with the most ‘under construction reactors’ of 22, partly explaining the obvious growth of China. It is unnormal that Japan had the lowest production in 2012 among the
Figure . Annual production of top eight countries during
–.
investigated period, which might relate to Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident. Fukushima acci- dent in 2011, ranked on the 7th level of the International Nuclear Event Scale [41], might have resulted in the low level of NST studies. In 2010, the Japanese government had adopted a new long-term energy plan fora substan- tial increase in Japan’s reliance on nuclear power over the next two decades, but Fukushima disaster resulted in the immediate destruction or shutdown of 10 reac- tors and cast doubt on the entire future of nuclear power
in Japan [42]. In general, national scientific activities in NST field is closely related to national planning and policy.
... International collaboration relationship
The average percentage of international collaboration in NST field during 2006–2015 is 24%, which means that about one-quarter of NST papers are contributed by more than one country. The global internationally collaborative Science and Engineering papers grew less than one-quarter to 32% from 2001 to 2013 [1]. The international collaboration rate of NST field is lower than the global level. The top three countries, the USA, Japan, and Germany, according to the number of total NST articles, had higher international collaboration rates than the world average (%MP >24%). Moreover, 16 countries of the top 20 countries involved more interna- tional collaboration than the world (%MP >24%); inter- national collaboration rate of South Korea was the same with the world (%MP = 24%). It seems that countries that were most active in international collaboration are mainly those in leading positions in the world. India and Iran, two developing nations, had the lowest inter- national collaboration rate (16% and 12%, respectively), which might partly due to that India do not signed Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and Iran did not signed NPT till 2015. Pos- sibly, refuse to sign NPT made them isolate from the international community to some extent. Furthermore, Iran was under sanctions during 2006–2015 by United Nations Security Council because of refusing to sus- pend its uranium enrichment program, which directly led the low international collaboration of Iran [43]. Not only in the NST field, the international collaboration rate of Iran was the least among the five top coun- tries, with the most published papers in the Middle East [43]. Removing sanctions in 2015 could help accelerate the growth rate of Iran’s scientific development in the future. Three countries – Belgium, Switzerland, and the Netherlands from Europe – hold the highest interna- tional collaboration rates of around 70%. Small coun- tries like European countries pursue international col- laboration more intensively than larger countries like the USA. It is generally assumed that there is a negative correlation between national scientific size and amount of international research collaboration: the larger the size is of the national scientific arena, the lesser the  amount of international research collaboration [44]. The ‘scientific dependence’ of small countries would explain their high collaboration.
To identify in-depth collaboration relationship among these top 20 countries, the international col- laboration network is exhibited in Figure 3, with their betweenness centrality. One point represents one coun- try collaborated with the top 20 countries, and only the top 20 countries are labeled. The size of the point means the quantity of multi-country articles of one
country. The line between two points means that there is international collaboration between two countries, and the thickness of the line represents the collabora- tion intensity between these two countries. The greater the betweenness centrality is in the network, the more dominant role it plays. Most international collabora- tion focused on these 20 countries themselves. The  countries on the edge of the network made less collab- oration with the top 20 countries. The Germany, USA, and France were the centers of the collaboration net- work, with the betweenness centrality greater than 200. Most European countries had intensive collaboration with each other. Although China and Japan published a great number of NST publications, both of them were relatively weak in terms of betweenness centrality. This indicated that China and Japan acted independently to develop their NST research, not relying on the collabo- ration with other countries. Moreover, Iran was isolated from the international community with zero between- ness centrality, probably due to political tensions with the West as a result of Iran’s nuclear program [45] and Iran Sanctions. The emergence of China, the abnormal decline of Japan, and the weak international collab- oration of Iran were closely related to the countries’ national policies, referred to great demand of energy, Fukushima disaster, and Iran sanctions, respectively. These phenomena provided another evidence that NST is a political-sensitive field.
... Citation impact of international collaboration Obviously, CPPMP (6.1) of the multi-country articles  in the world was much higher than the CPPSP  (4.3)  of single-country articles (Table 2). That meant each multi-country articles received two more citations than each single-country articles. Similarly, the top 20 coun- tries all have higher CPPs for the multi-country arti- cles than single-country articles, indicating that most leading countries benefited from international collab- oration. It also provides an evidence that international collaboration improves the impact of scientific papers in the micro level of country. For single-country arti- cles, Switzerland’s papers received the greatest citations (CPPSP = 6.8) on average, and then France (6.0), and the USA (5.6). International collaboration improved the impact of one country’s scientific papers in different extents. The top three countries with the highest CPPMP were different with that with the highest CPPall. Multi- country articles of Canada had the highest CPPMP (10), followed by Switzerland (8.5), and the UK (8.4), indicat- ing that their international collaboration works effec- tively. This phenomenon is common since various stud- ies revealed international collaboration plays an impor- tant role in improving citation impact [3,46].
3.3.Inter-institutional collaboration
... Institutional contributors
There are more than 20,000 institutions contributed the NST field in the latest decade. The top 20
Figure . International collaboration networks (> articles) of  most productive countries.
institutions are listed in Table 3. In terms of these 20 institutions, Japan contributed the most of six institu- tions, followed by the USA with five institutions, two each for France and Switzerland, and one each for China, India, Italy, Russia and South Korea. It is note- worthy that five of six top institutions from Japan are universities, while four of five institutions from the USA (Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and Argonne National Laboratory) are national lab- oratories. Except six universities from Japan and the USA, the other 14 of top 20 institutions are national or federal institutions, indicating that the development of NST field was dominated by governments. Japan’s shortage of minerals and energy was a powerful influ- ence on its politics, and more recent energy policy dur- ing 2002–2011 was focusing on nuclear [47]. Nuclear energy was a national strategic priority in Japan. Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA) led not only the total NST articles, but also the domestic multi-institution articles. The mission of JAEA is to contribute to the
welfare and prosperity of human society through NST. Specifically, JAEA emphasized a focus on responding to the accident of nuclear power station, research for safety improvement of nuclear energy, establishment of nuclear fuel cycle technology, and the treatment and disposal of radioactive waste [48]. In the second place was National Institute for Nuclear Physics (INFN) of Italy with 2281 articles. The INFN conducts theoretical and experimental research in the fields of subnuclear, nuclear and astroparticle physics, under the supervision of the Ministry of Education, Universities and Research [49]. Chinese Academy of Sciences ranked the third. However, a bias appeared because the Chinese Academy of Sciences has over many branches in different cities around China [50].
... Inter-institutional collaboration relationship The inter-institutional collaboration pattern could be understood by the SNI of single-institution articles, domestic multi-institution articles, international multi- institution articles which was 43:34:24. Among the 20
Table . Number of publications and citations per publication of  most productive institutions.
most productive institutions (Table 3), only two institu- tions had greater proportions of single-institution arti- cles than the world average; more than a half institutions had greater proportions of domestic multi-institution articles than the world average; and more than a half institutions had greater proportions of international multi-institution articles than the world average. This performance provides another evidence that the lead- ing institutions usually involved more collaboration.  It was found that the six institutions of Japan all had great proportions of domestic inter-institutional collab- oration (>50%), while five universities of Japan had low proportions of single-institution articles (≤20%). INFN with the second most productive NST articles from Italy had the most international multi-institution articles and the lowest single-author articles (SNI = 7.1:40:53). The INFN is a major contributor to exper- iments at other leading foreign laboratories in the USA, Russia, China, Japan, India, Germany, France, Switzer- land, and so forth [51]. That is one of the reasons    for the great quantity of INFN in relation to interna- tionally inter-institutional collaboration. It is notice- able that European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) from Switzerland had an extremely great pro- portion of international multi-institution articles, and a low proportion of domestic inter-institutional collabo- ration (SNI = 16:2.0:82). CERN is a European research organization that operates the world’s largest and  most complex scientific instruments to study the basic
constituents of matter –the fundamental particles. Founded in 1954, the CERN was one of Europe’s first joint ventures and now has 21 countries as its mem- bers [52]. This could partly explain why CERN and Switzerland had such a high value of international collaboration rate. Different inter-institutional collab- oration patterns were found for different countries, for instance, Japan  seems to focus more on domes-  tic inter-institutional collaboration, while European countries have stronger international inter-institutional links.
To display inter-institutional collaboration relation- ship, the visualization of inter-institutional collabora- tion among the top 20 institutions is shown in Figure
4.One point represents one institution, and only the top 20 institutions were labeled. The line between two points means that there is inter-institutional collabo- ration between two institutions, and the thickness of the line represents the collaboration intensity between these two institutions. In general, various institutions were involved in the collaboration of the top 20 institu- tions. Unlike the intensive collaboration among most of the top 20 countries, there were several clusters of col- laboration in Figure 4. The second position INFN from Italy seems to be a center of one cluster, having strong collaboration with other institutions, especially CERN from Switzerland. This performance may be attributed to that some of the most important research of INFN is conducted at CERN in Geneva, and around 1000  Figure . Inter-institutional collaboration networks (> articles) of  most productive institutions.
scientists from the INFN work in research groups at CERN, taking part in all experiments with the LHC par- ticle accelerator and the SPS accelerator [51]. The top institutions in Japan and the USA seem to have more collaboration with each other in their country other than outside country. The six institutions in Japan gath- ered together into a cluster, and the Japan Atom Energy Agency could be considered as a center. This perfor- mance was consistent with the fact that the universities of Japan had low single-institution articles and interna- tionally institutional articles.
... Citation impact of inter-institutional collaboration
Similar with the results of countries, CPP2015 of the international multi-institution articles (CPPIMP = 6.08) in the world was much higher than that of domestic multi-institution articles (CPPDMP = 4.60) and single- institution articles (CPPSP = 4.11) (Table 3). That means each international multi-institution articles received about two more citations than each single-institution articles, on average. European and American institu- tions have an advantage in the impact of scientific papers. Oak Ridge National Laboratory had good inde- pendent ability with the highest CPPIMP = 9.24, while
CEA Saclay obtained the highest CPPIMP = 14.6 by effective international collaboration among the top 20 institutions. Eighteen of the top 20 institutions have higher CPPs of the international multi-institution arti- cles than that of single-institution articles, except Chi- nese Academy of Sciences and Paul Scherrer Institute from Switzerland. A half of institutions had lower CPPs for their domestic multi-institution articles than single- institution articles. This also provides an evidence that international collaboration improves the impact of sci- entific papers for most institutions. However, domes- tic inter-institutional collaboration was more likely to reduce the citations of papers for certain top insti- tutions, for example, Chinese Academy  of  Sciences in China (CPPSNI = 1:0.69:0.99), European Organi- zation for Nuclear Research in Switzerland (CPPSNI
= 1:0.52:1.25), and Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute in South Korea (CPPSNI = 1:0.93:1.50). According to CPPSNI, internationally inter-institutional collaboration improved the citation impact of the pub- lications by INFN the most, about three times than the articles without any inter-institutional collabora- tion. Moreover, internationally inter-institutional col- laboration enhanced more than twice times of citation
impact for JAEA, Tohoku University, Lawrence Liv- ermore National Laboratory, University of  California
Berkeley, Russian Academy of Sciences, and Kyushu University. The impact improvement of domestic inter-institutional collaboration was weaker than the international collaboration (CPPSNI = 1:1.12:1.48).
4.Conclusion
NST field is a politically sensitive and safety-required field, and has been at a relatively mature stage in the lat- est decade. The high Pearson correlation of coefficient of nuclear power stations and number of publications indicated that national scientific activities in NST field is closely related to national demand, interests, and policy. This study with big data of more than 90,000 NST publications from SCI-Expanded supplemented fresh information to the exited collaboration patterns of scientific community, successfully used newly devel- oped indicators of TCyear, CPPyear, SNI, and CPPSNI, and software of Gephi 0.9.1. The identification of attractive collaborators and effectiveness of collabora- tion among countries and institutions were revealed not only to present whether it is worth to encourage international and institutional collaboration for policy- makers, but also to answer who are the prior national and institutional partners for policy-makers and researchers.
Even in NST field with many restrictions, both inter- national and inter-institutional collaboration could help enhance the impact of scientific publications. Although the number of single-institution articles is the greatest, followed by domestic inter-institutionally collaborative, and internationally collaborative arti- cles, the CPP2015 of internationally collaborative arti- cles, domestic inter-institutionally collaborative, and single-institution articles was in the reverse order. For most leading countries and institutions, international collaboration always improved the impact of papers, and domestic inter-institutional collaboration was more likely to bring the citations of papers up for leading institutions. Therefore, policy-makers and researchers were suggested to encourage international collabora- tion and inter-institutional collaboration to accelerate academic exchange and NST development. To carry out more effective and directive collaboration, the poten- tial collaborators and prior collaboration partners were carefully investigated and revealed. These requirements need more social science research and funding to incor- porate expertise and information from community leaders and indigenous groups [53].
The development of NST field could be sensitively affected by national policies, nuclear disaster, and inter- national restrictions. The USA took the leading posi- tion, followed by Japan and Germany, while China caught up with the world with the greatest growth rate, having the most ‘under construction reactors’ of 22. The USA, Germany, and France are the centers of the
global network, and have great potential for the con- trol of global international collaboration. In particular, the highest international collaboration rate appeared for European countries. The great growth rates of publications, but low collaboration rate and citation impact of China, suggested Chinese governments and institutions needed to be more open and take steps    to strengthen its international collaboration with other countries. The USA, Germany, and France were recom- mended as potentially helpful collaborators for scien- tific community. Technological collaboration between China and the United States in the field of nuclear  energy is important for developing alternative energy and promoting NST field [54]. Isolation of certain coun- tries, such as Iran, has a deterrent effect on these coun- tries, but it was detrimental to the development and optimize the allocation of global resource froma macro perspective. Although Iran signed nuclear agreement in 2015, many Iranian scientists were disappointed that the US scientific community remains on the side lines [55]. The nuclear collaboration between Iran and the other countries still needs a lot of work to melt the bar- riers among them.
Top countries and institutions usually involved more collaboration. JAEA seems to be the center of collabora- tion among Japanese institutions. INFN is another cen- ter of the global inter-institutional collaboration, and the linkage between INFN and CERN is notable. Euro- pean and American institutions performed well in the NST field. The high impact by the international collabo- ration with INFN, JAEA, Tohoku University, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, University of Califor- nia Berkeley, Russian Academy of Sciences, and Kyushu University indicated that they are suggested to be pri- orities as inter-institutional collaboration partners. If the conditions permit, international collaboration with European, American, and certain top institutions could be the first choice, when researchers or policy-makers are considering collaboration.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the National Natural  Sci-  ence Foundation of China [grant numbers 71473219 and 41372055] and China Association for Science and Technol- ogy Foundation [grant number DXB-2KQN-2016-002].
