<title>Interaction of ruthenium tetroxide with iodine- covered surfaces of materials in nuclear reactor containment building</title>
<author>Ivan Kajan, Sabrina Tietze & Christian Ekberg</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Nuclear Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden; b.Industrial Materials Recycling and Nuclear Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2016.1174627</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2016.1174627</URL>
ABSTRACT
Volatile iodine and ruthenium species are likely to be released from the fuel during a severe nuclear accident. Both iodine and ruthenium are expected to deposit on the surfaces in the con- tainment building of the nuclear power plant. It is assumed that, due to the different release times from the fuel, ruthenium will reach the containment at the time when surfaces are already deposited with iodine species. The influence of ruthenium tetroxide on elemental iodine-covered surfaces in the containment of nuclear power plants was studied in this work. The ability of ruthe- nium tetroxide to oxidize iodine deposits on zinc, aluminum, copper and epoxy paint at high humidity conditions was evaluated. Quantification of both iodine and ruthenium deposits was done by the means of gamma spectroscopy. The chemical speciation of deposited elements was observed with SEM, XPS and EDX techniques. Experiments showed that ruthenium tetroxide oxi- dized iodine deposits into the volatile forms of iodine on zinc and aluminum samples and higher iodine oxides in the case of copper and epoxy paint samples. A major increase of ruthenium uptake on iodine-exposed surfaces in comparison to clean surfaces was observed.
KEYWORDS
Ruthenium tetroxide; iodine; containment; nuclear accidents; volatile source term; surface interactions
1.Introduction
1.1.General introduction into importance of fission products behavior in case of a severe nuclear accident
Nowadays, a significant amount of electricity in the world is produced in nuclear power plants (NPPs).  Low emissions of greenhouse gasses during the nuclear fuel cycle and the small amounts of waste produced during the operation of NPPs make them a  favor- able source of electrical energy compared to alterna- tives such as coal or natural gas [1]. Two main draw- backs can be highlighted for NPPs: disposal of the long- lasting nuclear waste and the risk of severe nuclear  accidents. The nuclear accidents issue was empha- sized following the Fukushima Daiichi NPP accident in 2011.
During a severe accident, the main concerns are  volatile and semi-volatile fission products and their radioactive daughters. These can be released in elemental form (noble gasses, iodine) or can form volatile compounds (ruthenium, cesium, molybde- num) depending on the conditions during a nuclear accident [2]. Volatile forms of fission products can be readily released from the fuel and will eventually con- taminate an environment if leaked from a containment building. One of the most relevant contaminants is
iodine  with  its  radioactive  isotopes  131I  (T1/2  8  d),
129I  (T1/2       1.57E7  y),  132I  (T1/2     2.29  h)  and  133I
(T1/2     20.8 h) [3]. Iodine can be readily absorbed     by the thyroid gland, which leads to an increased risk of cancer due to the adsorption of iodine radioactive isotopes. Ruthenium is also a fission product of concern during a nuclear accident due to its high fission yield and semi-volatile nature [4]. From the radiologic point of view, the most important isotopes of ruthenium are 103Ru (T1/2  39 d) and 106Ru (T1/2  1 y) [3]. Ruthe- nium is known for its chemical toxicity [5] and RuO4 for its irritating effect on the respiratory system [6].
1.2.Transport and behavior of I and Ru during a severe nuclear accident
Both iodine and  ruthenium  can  be  released  during a severe nuclear accident but the  mechanisms  and the timing of their release is quite different. Iodine is released with the fission gases and volatile fission prod- ucts from the fuel in the very early stages of an acci- dent, during the period known as gap release [2,7]. The release of iodine continues in the early in-vessel stage, ex-vessel stage and the late in-vessel stage [7]. Its release occurred by diffusion toward the grain boundaries in the fuel and the diffusion governed mainly by the high temperature.
As the iodine reaches the grain surfaces, it accumu- lates into larger bubbles that move towards the free vol- ume of the fuel rod [2]. Therefore, iodine is quite mobile in the fuel. The expected amount of iodine released from the fuel is strongly dependent on the type of acci- dent scenario. The NUREG-1465 guideline predicts the release of iodine inventory into the containment as high as 71% in case of a boiling water reactor (BWR) and 76% in case of a pressurized water reactor (PWR) [7]. The chemical form of released iodine has been studied for decades and is still a matter of some debate, but the most relevant forms of iodine in the containment con- ditions seem to be cesium iodide (CsI), elemental iodine (I2), iodine oxides (IOx) and organic iodides [2,8,9]. Mainly I2 can interact with surfaces in the containment of a NPP that leads to the formation of the respec-  tive volatile iodides with different metals or painted surfaces [9,10].
On the other hand, the release of ruthenium is a more complicated process. Ruthenium belongs to the cate- gory of semi-volatile elements and is produced by fis- sion in the fuel in the form of pure metal or metal-   lic precipitates [2]. Metallic ruthenium has a melting point of 2619 K and a high boiling point of 4473 K  [11]; therefore, it stays in liquid or solid form in the fuel. Ruthenium forms volatile oxides such as RuO3 and RuO4 [12,13]. Consequently, ruthenium can escape from the fuel in the form of volatile oxides formed  particularly under oxidizing conditions and air ingress into the reactor vessel [2,14]. The release of ruthenium is strongly dependent on the oxygen potential dur-  ing the fuel degradation phase [15]. According to the NUREG-1465 guideline, the expected release of ruthe- nium inventory into the containment is 1.1% in case of a boiling water reactor (BWR) and 1.2% in case of a pres- surized water reactor (PWR) [7]. When ruthenium is released from a fuel, RuO3 is the strongly predominat- ing gaseous species of ruthenium [12]. As ruthenium is transported through the primary circuit and the tem- perature drops under 1000 K, RuO3 decomposes into solid RuO2 according to reaction (1) [16].
@1
Consequently, at the temperatures expected in the containment during an accident (<413 K), RuO4
Table . Calculated standard reduction potentials for the reactions of some metal iodides with RuO at  K.
Table . Surface areas of diﬀerent materi- als in nuclear reactor containments.
will be the dominating gaseous species of ruthenium [17].
1.3.Aim of the study
The different release times of iodine and ruthenium imply that when RuO4 reaches the containment, a part of the released I2 has already reacted with the con-  tainment surface materials [18]. In Swedish BWR and PWR containments, epoxy paint is applied on most of the concrete and steel surfaces [19]. Additionally, many construction component details in the containment are made of aluminum or metals that are galvanized with zinc. Copper aerosols are also likely to be released from the cables during a meltdown in a severe nuclear acci- dent [20]. Surface areas of reactive metals and painted surfaces for big reactor containments like Forsmark 3 (BWR) or Ringhals1 (BWR) are summarized in Table 1. All these materials have previously been proven to be reactive towards elemental iodine [10,19].
RuO4 is known to be a strong oxidizing agent (E0 Ru( VIII)/Ru( IV) 1.4 V) [21]. The high standard reduction potential of Ru(  VIII) leads to a possible oxi- dation of metal iodides and iodides in paint to elemen- tal iodine. Iodine released from the surfaces will con- tribute toa delayed volatile source term in the contain- ment. Standard reduction potentials for the respective reactions are calculated in Table 2.
In the present work, the interactions of gaseous RuO4 with elemental iodine-covered surfaces (epoxy paint, aluminum, zinc and copper) have been studied. This has been done through the consecutive deposition of I2  and RuO4  on different materials. The changes  of the chemical speciation of both ruthenium and iodine were examined together with quantification of deposited ruthenium and re-volatilization of iodine from the samples.
2.Experimental
2.1.Preparation of the samples
The metals used in this study were aluminum (99.5%, Alfa Aesar), zinc (99.5%, Alfa Aesar) and copper (99.5%, Goodfellow). The aluminum and zinc samples were supplied as rods with a diameter of 19 mm and 13 mm, respectively. The rods were then cut into round plates with a thickness of 3 mm. The copper was in the shape ofa metal plate with a thickness of 3 mm and was cut into squares with a side length of 10 mm. Prior to the deposition, the metals were cleaned with acetone and 95% ethanol, then washed with Milli-Q water (18 MK, Millipore) to wash off any organic impurities.
The epoxy paint used in the experiments was Teknopox Aqua VATM epoxy paint, which is also used in the containment of the Ringhals NPP [22]. Paint coupons were prepared by painting an approximately 100-μm-thick layer on one side of an approximately 3- mm-thick glass slide. Each paint coupon was square in shape, with a side length of 15 mm. After painting, the coupons were left to cure and evaporate excessive sol- vents for one month at room temperature in the labora- tory (294 0.5 K).
Samples were prepared by deposition of gaseous iodine (I2) onto metal and epoxy paint coupons as a first step. Deposition was performed as follows. Gaseous 131I labeled iodine (I2) vapor (ca. 250 kBq) was produced by the oxidation of potassium iodide with potassium per- manganate and concentrated sulfuric acid in a round bottom flask as previously described [22]. The gener- ated I2 vapor was deposited as elemental iodine crys- tals on an ice-cooled cold finger. The cleaned samples to be exposed with iodine as I2 were placed in the bot- tom of the exposure vessel. The cold finger was then transferred and inserted into the lid of the exposure ves- sel. When the cold finger reached room temperature (about 20 min), all elemental iodine crystals were evap- orated as I2 vapor and were available for sorption on the samples. The elemental iodine exposure was visible on all studied surfaces. Paint samples changed to a yel- low to brown color with increasing amount of deposited iodine.
Samples were measured with a High Purity Germa- nium (HPGe) detector (Ortec model GEM-15180-S) after the deposition to obtain the quantity of deposited iodine.
Due to the commercial unavailability of gaseous RuO4, this had to be prepared in-house prior to each deposition. The preparation method of RuO4 for the deposition was described as wet deposition in the pre- vious work [23]. The temperature during the deposi- tion was 295 K and the relative humidity was 99%, thus simulating the high humidity conditions expected dur- ing the nuclear accident [24]. The elemental iodine- deposited samples were left to interact with RuO4 for
18 hours. After this time, the samples were taken out from the vessel and measured on a HPGe detector for quantification of remaining iodine and deposited ruthe- nium on the samples.
Humidity and temperature in the reaction vessel during the depositions were measured using a Testo 635-thermohygrometer.
During the deposition of RuO4 on the samples, the samples were exposed to RuO4 separately for each material. With each elemental iodine-deposited sample, an identical reference sample without iodine deposit was placed into the vessel during the deposition of RuO4. This was done in order to evaluate the attrac- tion of RuO4 between the iodine deposited and unex- posed samples. Both samples were afterwards measured with a HPGe detector to obtain the quantity of the deposited ruthenium. A blank sample with only the iodine deposit was stored in a separate vessel with air atmosphere at the same temperature (295 K) as the RuO4 deposition was done. The blank sample was then used as a reference for the re-vaporized iodine frac- tion at a temperature of 295 K, without the interaction with RuO4.
2.2.Analysis of the samples
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hitachi TM 3000) with a backscatter electron system was used for analysis of the physical appearance of the deposits. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) (Oxford Inca 300 EDS System) in conjunction with the SEM supplied quantitative data regarding the chemical com- position of the deposits. EDX data were handled using Quantax 70 software.
For the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements, a PHI 5500 instrument was used. The X-ray voltage and power were 14 kV and 350 W, respec- tively. The acquisition conditions for the survey spec- tra (0–1100 eV) were 93.9 eV pass energy, 45° take-off angle and 0.4 eV/step. The acquisition conditions for the detailed scans were then 23.5 eV pass energy, 45° take-off angle and 0.1 eV/step. For the determination of the binding energies, three standard lines were used as references (Au 4f7/2: 84.0 eV, Ag 3d5/2: 368.3 eV, Cu 2p3/2: 932.7 eV). Calibration according to standard lines was carried out before each measurement under the same conditions as these of the selected region spec- tra. It was estimated that the experimental uncertainty of the binding energy was 0.1 eV. The ruthenium u 3d5/2 peak has a position close to the binding energy of the carbon C 1s peak occurring from the carbon con- tamination of samples from air, with a binding energy of 284.5 eV. This can lead to an uncertain determina- tion of the carbon peak position if charging of the sam- ple occurs. Therefore, compensation for the charging of the samples was done using a gold foil conductively connected to the measured sample. After this, the Au 4f7/2 peak with a binding energy of 84 eV was used for the charge corrections if necessary. Curve fitting  of recorded photoelectron peaks was performed using the PHI Multipak software by assuming Shirley back- ground. During the curve fitting process, an asymmet- rical or Gauss (20%)/Lorentz (80%) shape of the peaks was used. Reference values for RuO2 in the forms of both hydrated and anhydrous powder were obtained
by measurements of commercial powders (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich).
An XPS spectrum analysis was performed with the focus on the most significant ruthenium lines 3d5/2 and 3p3/2. In the case of iodine, the 3d5/2 line was evaluated and the obtained binding energies were compared with the literature data.
Quantification of iodine and ruthenium on the sam- ples was done with the use of the radiotracers  131I (T1/2  8 d) and 103Ru (T1/2  39.5 d). Measurements were performed using a HPGe detector (Ortec model GEM-15180-S). The number of counts at the 497 keV (ruthenium) and 365 keV (iodine) peaks were analyzed using Gamma vision software (Ortec). The resolution of the detector (FWMH) was 1.33 at the 662 keV peak of 137Cs. The samples were measured for 28,000 sec- onds after deposition of each element. Because of the relative measurements between the two depositions, no efficiency calibration of the detector was necessary. Compensation for radiotracer decay was done dur- ing the evaluation of the data. Experiments were per- formed in triplicates to assure the reproducibility of the results.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Analysis and SEM/EDX micrographs of samples
SEM/EDX analysis performed on the samples revealed the physical nature of the deposits. The left side of Figure 1 shows surface image after I2 vapor deposi- tion. After the deposition of iodine (I2) vapors, smooth deposits of iodine were formed on the copper, zinc and paint samples. SEM/EDX analysis of the aluminum samples showed the formation of iodine-rich spots. This behavior was attributed to the hygroscopicity of AlI3 [25] combined with a high humidity during the deposition. Reactions of iodine deposits with RuO4 led to significant physical changes in the microscopic scale. Cracks of the deposited layers were formed, as can be seen in the right side of Figure 1. This behavior was dominant mainly in the case of zinc and aluminum and was visible also to the naked eye. Copper and paint  showed more evenly distributed deposits without major cracks within the deposits. EDX analysis revealed that inside the cracks the quantity of iodine was much higher than that of ruthenium. In the areas where the layer was
Table . Reference values for binding energies of I d/ and Ru
d/ lines in diﬀerent compounds.
in one piece, ruthenium was predominating over iodine on the surface.
3.2.Chemical speciation of formed deposits
XPS analysis was performed after the deposition of I2 to obtain the chemical speciation of iodine on the sam- ples. Reference values for some iodine and ruthenium compounds that were used in this work are summa- rized in Table 3. The obtained binding energies for  the I 3d5/2 line and identified compounds of iodine are presented in Table 4. After the deposition of I2 onto the metal samples, respective metal iodides were formed. In the case of aluminum, no reference data could be found in the literature, but it was assumed not to be significantly different from the other metal iodides. This was previously also discussed in the work of Glänneskog et al. [10]. Therefore, it was concluded that the binding energy obtained by measurement is in the expected range for aluminum iodide. The analysis of XPS data obtained from measurements of the paint sample showed an occurrence of two iodine species on the sample. The first iodine I3d5/2 line has a  bind- ing energy of 618.7 0.1 eV,  which was attributed to  the iodide form on the sample. The exact speciation of iodide was not possible due to the complex chemical composition of the paint. Iodides usually have binding energies in the range of 618–619.7 eV [26]. Therefore, it can be assumed that the binding energy for I 3d5/2 line with an energy of 618.7 eV on the paint sample suf- ficiently fitted the energy range for the iodide form. The binding energy of the second I 3d5/2 line was deter- mined to be 620.4 eV. The values in the literature [26– 29] indicate that binding energies in the range of 619.9–
620.8 belong to the elemental iodine (I2). Based on this comparison, the second iodine species with the binding energy of 620.4 eV was identified as elemental iodine (I2) adsorbed on zinc.
After the interaction of RuO4 with the iodine- deposited samples, XPS measurements were repeated to reveal chemical changes on the samples. The bind- ing  energies  obtained  for  Ru  3d5/2,  I  3d5/2  and  O 1s lines are presented in Table 5. The details of determined binding energies are further discussed in Sections 3.2.1–3.2.3.
Figure . SEM micrographs of copper (a), paint (b), aluminum (c) and zinc (d) surfaces deposited with I (left side) and afterwards with RuO (right side).
... Aluminum
The aluminum sample did not show any chemical change with respect to the iodine speciation after inter- action with RuO4. As the calculated equilibrium con- stants in Table 2 indicate, the reaction with RuO4 should proceed to the formation of higher iodine oxides (I2O5). Therefore, it was surprising that this reaction product was not detected on the aluminum samples. One of the possible explanations is the different kinetics for oxi- dation of aluminum iodide into form of I2 and I2O5. Ruthenium deposited on the sample was identified to
be in the form of hydrated RuO2. Deposited ruthenium showed the same chemical speciation as after the inter- action of RuO4 with an unexposed aluminum sample [23].
... Zinc
It was observed that a new form of iodine appeared on the zinc samples after the interaction with RuO4 repre- sented in the XPS spectra by I 3d5/2 line with a binding energy of 620.3 0.1 eV. The species was identified to  be I2 adsorbed on the sample. This change is assumed
Figure . SEM micrographs of copper (a), paint (b), aluminum (c) and zinc (d) surfaces deposited with I (left side) and afterwards with RuO (right side).
... Aluminum
The aluminum sample did not show any chemical change with respect to the iodine speciation after inter- action with RuO4. As the calculated equilibrium con- stants in Table 2 indicate, the reaction with RuO4 should proceed to the formation of higher iodine oxides (I2O5). Therefore, it was surprising that this reaction product was not detected on the aluminum samples. One of the possible explanations is the different kinetics for oxi- dation of aluminum iodide into form of I2 and I2O5. Ruthenium deposited on the sample was identified to
be in the form of hydrated RuO2. Deposited ruthenium showed the same chemical speciation as after the inter- action of RuO4 with an unexposed aluminum sample [23].
... Zinc
It was observed that a new form of iodine appeared on the zinc samples after the interaction with RuO4 repre- sented in the XPS spectra by I 3d5/2 line with a binding energy of 620.3 0.1 eV. The species was identified to  be I2 adsorbed on the sample. This change is assumed
to originate from reaction (2). The original ZnI2 species was also identified on the sample. The ratio of the areas under the decomposed I2/ZnI2 peaks was established to be 1.14. Therefore, it can be concluded that the majority of iodine was oxidized to the adsorbed I2. The equilib- rium constants for the oxidation of ZnI in Table 2 pre- dict the similar behavior as in the case of AlI3, i.e. oxi- dation of iodine into the form of I2O5. However, this reaction product was not detected by the XPS measure- ments. Therefore, authors propose the same explana- tion as in the case of aluminum iodide. That different kinetics for the reactions play significant role in favoring the final product of the zinc iodide oxidation by RuO4 to be iodine in form of I2.
@2
The speciation of ruthenium on the sample was iden- tified to be hydrated RuO2, which was again in agree- ment with previous experiments on zinc samples with- outa deposit of iodine, explained by reaction (3) [23].
@3
... Copper and paint
The copper and paint samples showed similar effects after the interaction with RuO4 vapors. In both cases, iodine was partly oxidized to its higher oxidation state, for which the binding energy of the I 3d5/2 peak was determined to be 623.4 0.1 eV. This value is in a good agreement with the reference binding energy value for the I 3d5/2 peak in I2O5 [27]. It has been reported that higher iodine oxides and iodine oxo-acids usually have binding energies for I 3d5/2 peak in the region of 623– 624 eV [27]. Therefore, it is reasonable to think that the iodine speciation corresponds to the form of I2O5. This oxide is known to be strongly hygroscopic and there- fore can be readily hydrated into the form of HIO3 [32]
Table . Binding energies for Ru d/, I d/ and O s lines on samples ana- lyzed with XPS after the deposition of iodine and ruthenium tetroxide.
according to reaction (4). Because of the humid condi- tions during the experiments, this hydration of I2O5 on the samples is highly probable. The Teknopox Aqua VA paint used is a water-based epoxy paint that is high in humidity and, therefore, further supports the hydration of species. Due to the similar binding energies of the I 3d5/2 peak for these two compounds (623.3 for I2O5 and 623.1 for HIO3), it was impossible to distinguish between these two forms of iodine. XPS spectra demon- strating the formation of new iodine species after the interaction with RuO4 are presented in Figure 2[32].
@4
The ratio of the areas under the decomposed peaks for iodine species on the epoxy paint sample was 2.16 for I(  V)/I− forms. This value indicates that about 68% of iodide on the paint sample was oxidized into the I2O5/HIO3 form. The copper sample showed the ratio between areas of I( V)/I− to be 0.68. Thus, around 40% of iodide was oxidized into the form of I2O5/HIO3 on the copper sample. These results are different from the results obtained from the zinc and aluminum samples deposited with I2 where oxidation of respective metal iodides did not led to the production of I2O5/HIO3. In case of copper, the low solubility and hygroscopicity of the copper iodide [25] could play the role in the oxida- tion process, when compared to the highly hygroscopic ZnI and AlI3. This could affect the kinetics of the oxida- tion reactions leading to the formation of I2O5/HIO3.
3.3.Re-vaporization of iodine from the samples
After the deposition of RuO4, a significant release of iodine from zinc and aluminum samples was regis- tered using a 131I radiotracer. The released volatile iodine can be in several chemical forms such as I2(g), IO(g), HIO(g), or IOI(g) [33,34]. Due to the detection Figure . XPS spectra of iodine species on copper samples, before (a) and after (b) the interaction with RuO.
of adsorbed I2 on the zinc and paint samples, it was assumed that released iodine was most probably in the form of I2(g). The re-vaporized fractions of iodine are presented in Table 6. It is noticeable that no statisti- cally provable re-vaporization of iodine was detected from copper and paint samples where the formation of I2O5/HIO3 was observed. On the other hand, the con- siderable fraction of re-vaporized I2 was detected in the case of Al and Zn. Authors propose that the chemical reactions leading to the formation of volatile I2 after the interaction of iodine-deposited Zn and Al samples with RuO4 can be explained by Equations (2) and (5). This explanation is based on the revealed chemical spe- ciation of ruthenium on the samples as well as on the thermodynamic equilibrium calculations presented in Table 2. During the experiments, dependence between the mass of deposited iodine and mass of ruthenium needed to release 1 mg of elemental iodine from theFigure . Dependence of Ru mass needed to release  mg of ele- mental iodine from the (a) aluminum, (b) zinc deposited with I. Uncertainties are given as  sigma conﬁdence interval originat- ing from triplicates.
sample was also determined. Calculations showed cor- relation between the mass of deposited iodine and mass of ruthenium needed to release 1 mg of elemental iodine from the Al and Zn samples. The lower mass of deposited iodine was the higher mass of ruthenium was necessary for elemental iodine to be released. Figure 3 shows this tendency. The proper explanation of this behavior will need further studies.
@5
The reason for the different behaviors of copper and paint samples when compared with aluminum and zinc samples cannot be fully explained only by the present result. An explanation is that different mech- anism of iodine oxidation occurred by different solu- bility of iodide species on samples. The solubility of ZnI2 (438 g/100 g H2O) [25] and AlI3 (dissolves and reacts with water) [25] are orders of magnitude higher than the solubility of CuI (2E 5 g/100 g H2O) [25]. Additionally, both ZnI2 [35] and AlI3 [25] are strongly hygroscopic. Therefore, zinc and aluminum iodides were at least partly dissolved to form solution due to the high humidity during the experiments. This behav- ior can be observed from the SEM micrographs in Figure 1(c) where elemental iodine deposits on the alu- minum formed a liquid drops on the surface. The simi- lar behavior was observed by the naked eye on the zinc
Table . Fractions of re-vaporized iodine from the samples after the interac- tion with RuO. Uncertainties are given as  sigma conﬁdence interval.
samples deposited with iodine (I2), where wet stains were visible. It has been previously proven that RuO4 readily migrates to the water phase [36] where H2RuO5 can be formed [17]. As a consequence, oxidation of dis- solved ZnI2 and AlI3 takes place in the thin water layer formed on samples. This can affect the kinetics and mechanism of iodine oxidation. Due to the low solu- bility of I2 in water (0.03 g/100 g H2O) [25], I2 formed by oxidation of iodides will be easily transferred to the gaseous phase [33].
Due to the low solubility of copper iodide, no dis- solution of CuI occurred during the experiments. This suggests a different mechanism of iodide oxidation when compared to the zinc and aluminum samples. The work of Brown et al. on the potassium iodide oxida- tion by O3 in dry and humid conditions showed a pre- ferred formation of molecular iodine (I2) under humid conditions, whereas IO3− was formed in a dry atmo- sphere [34]. This can be an indication that the different results between AlI3, ZnI2 and CuI in our experiments were caused by different solubility and hygroscopicity of iodides.
The reactions taking place in the epoxy paint sam- ples are more difficult to evaluate due to the uncertainty about the speciation of the iodide form in the sample before the interaction with RuO4. The binding energy of the I 3d5/2 peak was identified as iodide. However, the exact chemical form remains unknown due to the com- plex chemical composition of the paint. Iodine can exist in the form of organic and inorganic iodides as the paint contains multiple organic compounds as well as water with which iodine can react to form new species [37]. The reactions of iodine with paint films are also depen- dent on multiple physical parameters, such as the paint age, which in turn determines, e.g. the humidity pro- file and the organic solvent profile that determines the amount of organic iodide formation. The formation of I2O5/HIO3 induced by oxidation with RuO4 is possibly explained by the low solubility of iodides formed in the paint. However, this explanation remains highly hypo- thetical. Further experiments are required to explain the different behavior of iodine and ruthenium on Al, Zn when compared to Cu and epoxy paint materials.
3.4.Retention of ruthenium on the samples
The interaction of RuO4 with surfaces led to the for- mation of ruthenium deposits. These deposits were quantified with the use of 103Ru radiotracer and gamma
Table . Increase of ruthenium sorption on samples with pre- deposited iodine compared to ruthenium sorption on non- iodine exposed samples.
spectroscopy. The evaluations of the ratios of ruthe- nium being adsorbed on non-exposed and iodine- exposed surfaces are presented in Table 7.
The results obtained indicate that iodine-covered surfaces strongly attract volatile RuO4 when compared to iodine-unexposed metals or paint. A correlation between increased adsorption of ruthenium and re- vaporized fraction of iodine can be seen from the data on aluminum and zinc samples in Tables 6  and  7. The calculated equilibrium constants in Table 2 pre- dict that ruthenium should be reduced into the form of solid RuO2 on all iodine-covered surfaces. However, an increase of ruthenium adsorption on the copper and paint samples pre-deposited with iodine was not so prominent. One of the possible explanations can be different kinetic parameters of reactions taking place on the elemental iodine-deposited copper/epoxy paint and zinc/aluminum samples. Further investigation is required to confirm the explanation.
4.Conclusions
The experiments performed in this work reveal the abil- ity of RuO4 to change the chemical speciation of ele- mental iodine deposited on reactive metals or epoxy paint films at room temperature. It was suggested that the humidity, as well as the solubility of metal iodides, has significant effects on the chemical speciation of iodine species formed by the interaction with RuO4. The interaction of RuO4 with copper iodide led to a significant oxidation of iodide (47%) into the chemical form of I2O5/HIO3. The same behavior was observed for iodine deposited on epoxy paint samples, where around 68% of the iodine was converted to the form of I2O5/HIO3. Iodide from zinc iodide was partially oxi- dized by RuO4 into the form of elemental iodine that was partly released from the sample (29.3 2.2)% and partly stayed adsorbed on the surface. In the case of aluminum samples, a significant volatilization of iodine (21.7 2.1)% was also detected; however, consequent adsorption of elemental iodine on the surface was not observed.
Iodine-covered surfaces were shown to function as a more efficient trap for gaseous RuO4 when compared to the non-iodine-exposed metals or paint surfaces in the containment of NPPs in the case of a severe nuclear accident. However, sorption of ruthenium in the form of RuO4 will cause release of iodine into the gas phase from zinc and aluminum surfaces. Therefore, iodine released from those surfaces will contribute to a delayed volatile source term in the containment of a nuclear power plant. In previous works, it was shown that iodine does not have significant preference regarding sorption on the reactive metal materials [10]. However, ruthe- nium sorption occurs on aluminum surfaces in a sig- nificant extent when compared to copper or zinc [23]. As it was shown in this work, the deposition of metals with elemental iodine will lead to increased sorption of ruthenium on the aluminum and zinc when compared to the copper or non-iodine-deposited surfaces.
These findings indicate the relevance of studies of chemical interactions of fission products on surface materials in the containment during a nuclear accident.
Acknowledgments
This work is funded by the Swedish APRI-8 project. The authors are thankful to Dr P.L. Tam for assistance with XPS analyses.
