<title>Mechanical and Chemical Properties of Harvested Hypalon Cable Jacket Subjected to Accelerated Thermal Aging</title>
<author>Robert C. Duckworth, Michelle K. Kidder, Tolga Aytug, Leonard S. Fifield, William Glass III & Sarah Davis</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Oak Ridge National Laboratory, One Bethel Valley Road, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831
b.Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 902 Battelle Boulevard, Richland, Washington 99352
c.University of Tennessee–Knoxville, Department of Nuclear Engineering, 315 Pasqua Nuclear Engineering Building, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2017.1419783</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2017.1419783</URL>
Abstract — For nuclear power plants (NPPs) considering second license renewal for operation beyond 60 years, knowledge of long-term operation, condition monitoring, and viability for the reactor components including reactor pressure vessel, concrete structures, and cable systems is essential. Such knowledge will provide NPP owners/ operators with a basis for predicting performance and estimating the costs associated with monitoring or replacement programs for the affected systems. For cable systems that encompass a wide variety of materials, manufacturers, and in-plant locations, accelerated aging of harvested cable jacket and insulation can provide insight into a remaining useful life and methods for monitoring. Accelerated thermal aging in air at temperatures between 80°C and 120°C was conducted on a multiconductor control rod drive mechanism cable manufactured by Boston Insulated Wire (BIW). The cable, which had been in service for over 30 years, was jacketed with Hypalon and insulated with ethylene propylene rubber. From elongation at break (EAB) measurements and supporting Arrhenius analysis of the jacket material, an activation energy of 97.84 kJ/mol was estimated, and the time to degradation, as represented by 50% EAB at the expected maximum operating temperature of 45°C, was estimated to be 80 years. These values were slightly below previous measurements on similar BIW Hypalon cable jacket and could be attributed to either in-service degradation or variations in material properties from production variations. In addition, results from indenter modulus measurements and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy suggest possible markers that could be beneficial in monitoring cable conditions.
Keywords — Long-term electrical cable performance, Hypalon, accelerated aging.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
In nuclear power plants (NPPs), instrumentation and control (I&C) cables play a critical role in maintaining safe and efficient operations. The reliability of these cables from a material integrity standpoint for long-term operation beyond their initial 40-year qualified life is an issue as U.S. utilities such as Dominion Energy, Inc. and Exelon Generation pre- pare for a second license renewal that will extend the opera- tion of their NPPs from 60 to 80 years.1 While limited monitoring data in current NPPs suggest that the dose, dose rate, and temperature to which the I&C cables have been subjected during their initial 40-year operation are consider- ably less than assumed in their qualification standards,2,3 the amount of margin remaining in the cable presents a level of uncertainty. To address this uncertainty, formal cable aging management programs have been implemented at NPPs (Refs. 4 and 5), and active forums on current cable-related issues6 have been established. In support of these efforts, the
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), and the U.S. Department of Energy	(DOE),	through	its	Light	Water	Reactor
Sustainability (LWRS) Program, are actively pursuing research to address knowledge gaps identified in the NRC/DOE Extended Material Degradation Assessment7 with regard to harvested low- and medium-voltage I&C cables to further reduce uncertainty, increase  confidence,  and identify specific cable jacket and insulation materials that could pose issues for long-term, safe, and reliable NPP operation.
To address the knowledge gaps, accelerated aging studies with respect to temperature and radiation were performed on harvested I&C cable jacket and insulation materials to assess the extent of degradation relative to as-installed specifications and to develop or refine nondestructive evaluation techniques to quantify and track degradation. To focus efforts on materi- als relevant to current NPPs and to set programmatic prio- rities, databases compiled from previous surveys identifying NPP-employed I&C cable materials with respect to insulation
and manufacturer8,9 were used as guidance. Table I shows a
II.ARRHENIUS ANALYSIS
To determine the performance of I&C cables for which the expected lifetime is in the order of tens to hundreds of years and for which the maximum oper- ating temperatures at installed locations ranges from 30°C to 60°C, accelerated aging at higher tempera- tures is employed to extrapolate I&C cable perfor- mance. This is accomplished by assuming that the degradation mechanism and the rate  of  degradation  are functionally related  to  the  exposure  temperature of the cable. For I&C cables that are qualified for  NPPs, as well as many other polymers, an Arrhenius analysis is utilized in which the rate of degradation is expressed as
@1
The rate of degradation is found by comparing a mea- sured property, often EAB for I&C cables, across differ- ent temperatures over time, as with the data presented in Fig. 1 (Ref. 10). The data in Fig. 1a were obtained from a Hypalon cable jacket manufactured by a different com- pany, Eaton. A reference temperature of 100°C was selected, and the remaining data were multiplied by a
TABLE I
Top  Ten  Manufacturers Used in NPPs*
Fig. 1. (a) EAB for a CSPE cable jacket after accelerated aging at temperatures between 80°C and 130°C as a function of time  and (b) EAB for Hypalon cable jacket after multiplying each temperature by a constant assuming a reference temperature of 100°C (Ref. 10). The Hypalon for this case was manufactured by Eaton.
constant C until it overlapped the reference (Fig. 1b) (Refs. 11 and 12). The constant, which is related to the rate of degradation, was plotted as a function of inverse temperature as shown in Fig. 2, and the  activation  energy was obtained from its slope. Using Eq. (1), Ea is 111 kJ/mol for the Eaton Hypalon. This activation energy, along with the time for degradation to 50% EAB at the reference temperature, was utilized to determine the expected time to degradation at the maximum expected operating temperature. For this case, with a maximum operating temperature of 45°C, the estimated time to degradation was ~400 years. Note that effects of diffu- sion-limited oxidation and non-Arrhenius degradation with respect to temperature were not accounted  for in  this prediction.7
Fig. 2. Arrhenius plot of constants that were found from EAB measurements in Fig. 1 for Hypalon cable jacket as a function of inverse temperature.10 The Hypalon for this case was manufactured by Eaton.
III.CABLE HARVESTING AND CHARACTERIZATION
A cross section of the harvested BIW-manufactured I&C cable is given in Fig. 3. This cable, which was used in an auxiliary space outside the missile barrier of the NPP,  is  rated  for  operation  at  600  V and  contains two
12 American wire gauge (AWG) insulated wires and twenty-two  20  AWG  insulated  wires.  The  cable,  of
25.4 mm outer diameter, has a jacket of 2.74-mm-thick Hypalon (a chlorosulfonated polyethylene [CSPE]), a thin-foil ground shield, and multiple conductors insulated with ethylene propylene rubber (EPR) of thickness between 1.1 and 1.3 mm. In addition to the EPR insula- tion, the conductors are covered with a 0.4-mm-thick dyed coating of CSPE to assist circuit connection discri- mination and to further protect the EPR.
For the BIW cable, short sections of cable and cable jacket specimens, which were prepared according to American Society for Testing and Materials standard D638-14 (Ref. 13), were placed into several different air convection furnaces (Fig. 4) at temperatures ranging from 80°C to 120°C. Cable and jacket specimens were removed periodically over the course of several hundred days, and the samples were kept at ambient conditions for 24 to 48 h [per International Electrotechnical Commission/Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEC/IEEE)  stan- dard 62582] before commencing the measurements.14
Mechanical properties of the Hypalon cable jacket over the duration of the accelerated thermal aging were tracked through EAB and IM techniques. For EAB assessment, as guided by IEC/IEEE 62583–3 (Ref. 14), dog-bone-shaped cable jacket samples of 63.5 mm length and 9.53 mm width were placed in an Instron 4450 tensile tester and stressed (as a function of strain
Fig. 3. Cross section of BIW control rod cable, showing individual wires coated with CSPE and insulated with EPR.
Fig. 4. Example of (a) furnace and (b) sample arrange- ment used in accelerated thermal aging of BIW cable and jacket samples.
measured at 1.27 mm/s) until failure occurred. This process was repeated on five samples at each tempera- ture to average out possible material variations. For IM assessment, an indenter polymer aging monitor was used on cable jacket samples prior to EAB measure- ments. In accordance with IEC/IEEE 62582–3 guidelines,15 the same dog-bone-shaped cable jacket samples were placed onto unaged 10-mm-diameter cable samples to recreate the cable geometry. The inden- ter force during the measurements was ramped from 0 to 9 N. The IM of the cable jacket was calculated from the slope of the change in deformation with respect to the force applied [specifically, the difference in  force of    4 and 1 N (3 N) divided by the difference in deformation at 4 and 1 N].
Chemical  analysis  of  each  cable  jacket  sample
was  performed by utilizing Fourier  transform infrared
spectroscopy (FTIR) to correlate the mechanical changes with changes  in  the  chemical  structure  of the cable jacket. Given that  portable  FTIR  systems  are under consideration for use in cable monitoring programs, the FTIR response could prove viable for nondestructive evaluation of the jacket. FTIR analysis was carried out with a Digilab FTS 7000  equipped  with a deuterated triglycine sulfate detector and  a  PIKE MIRacle attenuated total reflectance accessory equipped with a diamond crystal. FTIR examines the formation of oxidized species and the changes to chemical bonds through the absorption of infrared energy. More detailed information on FTIR techniques and their use in characterizing polymers can be found in Refs. 16, 17, and 18.
IV.RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
IV.A.Elongation at Break
Elongation at break data as a function of time for different aging temperatures between 80°C and  120°C are shown in Fig. 5 for BIW  Hypalon  and  Hyp-08  cable jackets. The Hyp-08 cable jackets are  BIW Hypalon  cable  jackets  evaluated  previously   by   Gillen et al.10 Comparison of the current or BIW  Hypalon and  the  previous  Hyp-08  measurements shows that the  amount of time  required to see a drop     in EAB at a given temperature for the current BIW Hypalon is shorter. For example, reaching 50% EAB at   a temperature of 100°C, which is often used as the definition of cable end-of-life performance, was esti- mated to take ~130 days for the harvested BIW cable jacket and 220 days for the Hyp-08. It should be noted that while Hyp-08 was manufactured by BIW and is of the same vintage as the harvested cable jacket, the Hyp-08 originated from a different cable type consist-  ing of three conductors instead of multiple conductors. Hence, the results could have been affected by possible subtle differences in the chemical formulation of the different cabling.
To  compare  the  performance of these two types of
cable jackets, Arrhenius constants C were obtained (Fig. 5) assuming a reference temperature of 100°C where C = 1. When the constants were compared for both cables as well as to the constants obtained for another type of Hypalon in the Gillen database (Hyp-06), their functional dependence appeared simi- lar (Fig. 6). Using Eq. (1) and the slope of the expo- nential curve fit in Fig. 6, the activation energy was
Fig. 5. (a) Comparison of EAB as a function of time at different aging temperatures for current (BIW) and pre- vious (Hyp-08) (Ref. 9) BIW Hypalon data, and
(b) comparison of the two data sets after applying an Arrhenius constant C to each data set with 100°C as the reference point (C = 1).
estimated to be 97.84 kJ/mol for the harvested BIW cable jacket and 103.92 kJ/mol for the Hyp-08. The exponential curve fit was utilized to calculate the Arrhenius constant at the maximum expected operat- ing temperature of 45°C. The maximum expected operating temperature of  45°C was selected based on   a review of the environmental qualification for the location where the cable was harvested. Dividing the time to 50% EAB by this constant, the time to 50% EAB at the maximum expected operating temperature  is estimated as ~80  years  for  the  harvested  BIW cable jacket and ~150 years for the Hyp-08 cable jacket.
While 50% EAB is often selected to indicate end-of- life degradation, there are several factors to consider
Fig. 6. Arrhenius constants as a function of inverse tem- perature found for BIW Hypalon cable jackets (BIW and Hyp-08) from Fig. 5. Additionally, Arrhenius constants for the Eaton Hypalon are also given (Hyp-06). The lines are the exponential curve fits for each Hypalon cable jacket.
when comparing this result to previous measurements. First, the types of BIW cable could have chemical var- iations that could lead to different accelerated aging performance. The harvested cable is a multiconductor cable, whereas Hyp-08 is an extruded three-conductor cable. While there are not data like FTIR to compare the chemical compositions of harvested BIW cable to the Hyp-08, it is possible that differences could be present owing to the functional nature of the jacket in each case. Second, the estimated Arrhenius constants for 80°C and 110°C for the harvested BIW cable were  found  from data with no noticeable degradation toward 50% EAB that could impact the curve fit for calculation of activa- tion energy. The activation energy drives  the  constant for determination of time to 50% EAB. For example, if the activation energy increased from 97.84 kJ/mol  to  103 kJ/mol, the resultant time to 50% EAB at the max- imum expected operating temperature would increase to 95 years. Third, failure of the jacket does not necessarily coincide with electrical failure of the I&C cable  given  its complex structure. Comparison of the insulation per- formance as a function of jacket degradation needs to be addressed before any judgment on overall cable perfor- mance is rendered. Finally, current standards are built  not on 50% EAB comparison but on testing of materials that have been subjected to design basis events.19,20 Clearly, more detailed analysis is required before draw- ing definitive conclusions on the mechanism(s) under- lying the observed decrease in activation energy and  time to 50% EAB.
IV.B.Indenter Modulus
Indenter modulus data for the harvested BIW Hypalon jacket are presented in Fig. 7. When com- pared to EAB measurements, the functional time dependence appears to be  quite  similar  in  that  the rise  in  indenter   modulus   appears   to   track   with the decrease in EAB as shown in Fig. 8 for two temperatures, 100°C and 110°C. This would  support the ability of IM to serve as a method for nondestruc- tive evaluation of cable condition for this  type  of  cable
When compared to the limited data collected pre- viously on the Hyp-08, the time at which the indenter modulus increases and the rate of rise for the same temperature, 110°C, are different. Both could be Fig. 7. Indenter modulus as a function of time and tem- perature for harvested BIW Hypalon cable jacket. Data from a previously reported measurement of Hyp-08 at 110°C (Ref. 9) are provided for comparison.
attributed to variations in the Hypalon jacket that are mentioned in Sec. IV.A, and comparison of  these results to other BIW-manufactured insulations could help determine whether the differences are simply a variation from aging or manufacturing.
IV.C. Fourier Transform Infrared Reflectometry
Examples of FTIR spectra for BIW Hypalon cable jackets with different exposure times and temperatures are given in Figs. 9 and 10. For the different exposure times and temperatures, FTIR spectra for three separate samples that were aged at the same time and temperature were compared to determine the extent of variability, and the variation was minimal. While the carbon black filler and the overall black color make meaningful FTIR measurements difficult due to the limited reflected light, notable changes in the FTIR spectra that possibly correlate to age-related chemical activ- ity were observed at both temperatures. For example, for- mation of terminal vinyl groups (CH = CH) and evidence of oxidation as a function of exposure time are apparent by the increased absorbance near 1000 cm−1 and between 3200 and 3600 cm−1, respectively.21,22 Additional changes of note are increases at 2848 and 2916 cm−1 that are indicative of changes to C-H bonds. However, systematic change did not appear consistent between temperatures. For the C-H bonds at 2848 and 2916 cm−1, these peaks increased with time exposed at 100°C. At 110°C, these peaks dropped as time exposed increased from 21 to 35 d. While the ratio of peaks in the form of the carbonyl index is often used to track change in chemical structure, its usefulness as a nondestruc- tive technique requires further investigation. This to deter- mine whether the variation observed is due to surface contamination and/or preparation.
Fig. 8. Comparison of EAB and IM as a function of time for harvested BIW Hypalon cable jacket aged in air at temperatures of (a) 100°C and (b) 110°C.
Fig. 9. FTIR spectra for BIW Hypalon as a function of time exposed to air at 100°C.
Fig. 10. FTIR spectra for BIW Hypalon as a function of time exposed to air at 110°C.
V.CONCLUSIONS
Accelerated thermal aging at temperatures between 80°C and 120°C was performed on a harvested BIW-manufactured cable to determine the extent to  which cable jacket performance changed after being in operation for over 30 years. From mechanical character- ization via EAB and IM, degradation appeared to occur sooner when compared to previously reported results on Hypalon-jacketed BIW cables of alternate construction (i.e., Hyp-08). While the reduction of the remaining useful life as judged from the jacket at a maximum operating temperature of 45°C is reduced to 80 years, it should be noted that the context for this 80 years is applicable only to
the jacket of a cable that has been in service for 30 years and that the insulation of the conductors in the cable is the final judge of cable performance and reliability.
From Arrhenius analysis, the dependence of degrada- tion with respect to exposure temperature and time suggests that the mechanism(s) for chemical degradation are similar when compared to similar Hypalon jackets examined pre- viously. From FTIR measurements, these chemical changes were identified as the formation of terminal vinyl groups, oxidation products, and alterations in the C-H bonds. From Arrhenius analysis, the activation energy was estimated to be 97.84 kJ/mol, which is slightly less than the values obtained for other Hypalon cable jackets. While the higher activation energies for different Hypalon manufacturers such as Eaton could suggest that their lifetime would be longer, the differences in activation energy and subsequent time to 50% EAB degradation could be tied to differences in mechanical fillers, flame retardants, or other components unique to each manufacturer. In the end, cable performance with respect to mechanical and electrical properties of har- vested cables must be done for the assessment to be valid and beneficial to the cable operator.
Future work is planned to better understand the func-
tional dependence of the degradation within the BIW- manufactured cable types of different cable geometries, including depth profiling FTIR to identify the possible chemical changes taking place within the cable jackets. However, factors related to differences in BIW Hypalon chemical composition and uncertainty from accelerated thermal aging performed to date require additional testing and uncertainty analysis before definitive conclusions can be drawn on BIW Hypalon jackets and cables.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported under the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy LWRS Program. The authors would also like to express thanks for the discussion and feed- back received from Andrew Mantey at EPRI and Keith Leonard at Oak Ridge National Laboratory as well as the cable that was provided by EPRI through Analysis and Measurement Solutions Corporation. This paper has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). The U.S. government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publica- tion, acknowledges that the U.S. government retains a nonex- clusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this paper, or allow others to do so, for U.S. government purposes. DOE will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accor- dance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/ downloads/doe-public-access-plan).
