<title>MODULAR TESTING OF DINITROGEN OXIDE (NITROGEN HEMIOXIDE) CATALYTIC DECOMPOSITION TECHNOLOGY FOR OFF-GAS CLEANUP SYSTEMS FOR BREST SPENT NUCLEAR NITRIDE FUEL REPROCESSING</title>
<Affiliation>1.Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences (IPCE RAS), Moscow, Russia.
2.Bochvar High-Technology Research Institute of Inorganic Materials (VNIINM), Moscow, Russia; e-mail: yavoskresenskaya</Affiliation>
<author>S. A. Kulyukhin, A. A. Bessonov, I. A. Rumer,O. A. Ustinov, and Yu. A. Voskresenskaya UDC 66.074.48
</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1007/s10512-019-00592-4</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1007/s10512-019-00592-4</URL>
Abstract
Dinitrogen oxide N2O (nitrogen hemioxide) is one of the harmful components of the off-gases during the reprocessing of spent nitride fuel. It enters the gas phase during the dissolution of nitride fuel in nitric acid and denitration of high-activity raffinate or the bottom solution from the evaporation of intermediate-level wastes. The preferred method of neutralizing it is high-temperature catalytic decomposition. Compositions based on γ-aluminum oxide coated with catalysts were found previously. One of the compositions was checked on a semi-industrial setup. The efficiency of N2O decomposition was studied as a function of tem- perature. It was established that almost complete decomposition occurs at 465–480°C. The specific rate of N2O decomposition at 425–480°C was found as a function of the initial concentration. It is shown that for constant initial concentration of N2O the specific decomposition rate is almost the same in the investigated temperature interval.
Currently a technology is being developed for reprocessing spent nitride fuel from the BREST reactor. One of its tasks is to clean up off-gases. Full-scale mock-ups of aerosol fiberglass filters have been developed, manufactured, and tested for coarse (FSGO) and fine (FARTOS) cleanup, apparatus for trapping nitrogen oxides of medium concentration 1–100 g/m3 (BRUNS – reagent-free trapping by a bulk layer) and low concentration <1 g/m3 (SMOG – silica-gel-urea cleanup of gases), each with a capacity of 50 m3/h [1].
Dinitrogen oxide N2O (nitrogen hemioxide) is present among the harmful components entering the off-gases during reprocessing of spent nitride fuel. It enters into the gas phase upon dissolution of nitride fuel in nitric acid and denitration of high-activity raffinate or bottom solution from evaporation of intermediate level waste [2, 3]. Methods of neutralizing N2O in the off-gases were analyzed earlier; high-temperature catalytic decomposition by the reaction 2N2O → 2N2 + O2 was chosen [4].
Several compositions based on γ-aluminum oxide coated with iron, cobalt, and ruthenium oxides were chosen on the basis of laboratory studies. A module of a catalytic reactor was developed and fabricated at SverdNIIkhimmash for an expand- ed check of the catalytic decomposition of dinitrogen oxide. An experimental lot of one of the compositions of the catalyst was prepared and tested. The results are reported in the present article.
The off-gas cleanup module consists of two cylindrical chambers: an inner chamber 1 with diameter 102 mm and height 530 mm and an outer chamber 2 with diameter 154 m m and height 540 ml (Fig. 1). The inner chamber is intended for charging the catalyst 3. The outer cylinder of the module is wound with a heating coil 4 and covered with thermal insulation 5. A control block 6 regulates the warming of the coil. The gas 7 to be cleaned is fed into the upper part of the outer chamber, flows downward and heats up in the process, and is introduced from below into the inner chamber along a layer of the charged TABLE 1. Aerodynamic Characteristics of a Module with Catalyst Layer of Different Height Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the gas cleanup module.
catalyst, passed through it upwards and egresses at the top 8. Samples 9.1, 9.2 are obtained at the ingress and egress of the reaction zone.
The aerodynamic characteristics of the module and the degree of decomposition of dinitrogen phosphate as a func- tion of temperature and time were studied in the tests.
Investigation of the aerodynamic characteristics of layers of the catalyst. The granules of the composite material were 4–6 mm in size. The aerodynamic resistance of the samples was determined for different rates of passage of the airflow. The pressure drop ΔP as a function of the height of the layer of material with linear velocity of the gas flow 1.4–12.6 cm/sec is presented in Table 1. For a 500 mm high layer (the maximum for the module), the pressure drop was equal to 60, 580, and 1150 Pa for linear velocity of the gas flow 1.4, 7.3, and 12.6 cm/sec, respectively, i.e., the aerodynamic resistance of the layer
of 4–6 mm granules is low.
Dinitrogen oxide decomposition efficiency. The efficiency of decomposition on catalyst granules was studied at the next. A vertical cell with a 5 cm2 cross section, through which air with a specified dinitrogen oxide content was passed at the requisite velocity, was singled out in order to decrease the flow rate in the charge volume of the module. The studied catalyst was charged into the vertical cell to a specified height, and the cell was placed in the inner cylinder of the module. An ingress opening was left in the bottom part of the inner chamber, the size of the opening corresponding to the diameter of the vertical cell, and the opening and the cell were lined up. A definite amount of N2O was introduced into a separately arranged pre-evac- uated reaction chamber with volume 1500 cm3, and air was used to bring the pressure inside the chamber up to atmospheric pressure. The vessel was connected to the reactor’s ingress connection. A storage tank with volume 1500 cm3 was connected to the egress connection in order to collect gaseous products of catalytic decomposition. A forevacuum pump was used to pre-evacuate the storage tank.
TABLE 2. Catalytic Decomposition of N2O on a 60 mm High Layer of Catalyst at Different Temperatures and Average Linear Velocity of the Gas Flow 1.4 cm/sec]TABLE 3. Decomposition of N2O on a 150 mm Thick Layer of Catalyst at Different Temperatures and Average Linear Velocity of the Gas Flow 1.5 cm/sec
After the system was assembled, the apparatus was heated to 250–480°C. After the required temperature was reached, the valves at the ingress and egress lines were opened and air was pumped at a definite velocity from the reaction chamber through the column of the vertical cell into the storage tank in order to collect the gaseous products. The average velocity of the gas flow was ~0.6 liter/min. After equalization and attainment of atmospheric pressure in the system and the storage tank, the experiment was stopped, the mainline valves were closed, the storage tank was disconnected, and samples of the gas phase were taken from the storage tank into a cuvette in order to measure the IR spectra by the procedure of [4]. The cleaned-up gas was passed in pulses through the N2O-decomposition catalyst and the decomposition efficiency was determined.
In the first series of tests, the catalyst layer was 60 mm high. The average linear velocity of the gas flow was 1.4 cm/sec.
As one can see from Table 2, dinitrogen oxide starts to decompose at 450°C but the decomposition is incomplete.
TABLE 4. Rate and Specific Rate of Decomposition of Dinitrogen Oxide versus Temperature
Fig. 2. Degree of decomposition of N2O versus temperature.
To achieve a higher degree of decomposition, tests were performed with a larger amount of catalyst, for which the height of the layer of composite material in the reactor was increased to 150 mm. The volume of the composite layer in this case was equal to 75 cm3, the average velocity of the gas flow 1.5 cm/sec, and the average contact time of the gas phase with the catalyst 11 sec. Pulsed passage of dinitrogen oxide was conducted once per day, the catalyst was not changed between the experiments, and only air was passed in order to remove the remaining traces of N2O in the system. The amount of N2O in the airflow and the temperature of the catalyst were measured in the experiment. We can see from Table 3 and Fig. 2 that al- most complete decomposition of N2O is observed at 465–480°C. The data in Table 3 were used to calculate the specific rate of decomposition vsp, which for the passage rate is 0.6 liter/min, and the initial and final content of N2O in the purified gas
TABLE 5. Initial and Final N2O Content in the Cleaned-up Gases
Fig. 3. Specific decomposition rate versus temperature with initial N2O content 0.49–0.71 (a), 1.07–1.29 (b), 2.41–2.68 mmol (c).
(Tables 4, 5 and Fig. 3). As we can see from the presented data, the rate of decomposition depends on the initial N2O content and decreases proportionally as the content decreases. For constant initial concentration N2O, the specific rate of decomposi- tion is almost identical for temperature in the indicated temperature range (Fig. 4). The throughput capacity of the module is approximately 1 m3/h.
Conclusion. A catalytic decomposition module, developed for a reactor, with throughput capacity 1 m3/h for    4–6 mm γ-aluminum oxide granules coated with a catalyst was used to attain complete decomposition of dinitrogen oxide at 425–480°C with contact time 11 sec. The pressure differential did not exceed 1.15 kPa with maximum linear velocity of the gas flow 12.6 m/sec.
Fig. 4. Specific decomposition rate versus the initial N2O content at temperature 425–440 (a), 450–460 (b), 465–480°C (c).
The obtained results will make it possible to calculate the parameters of industrial apparatus for removing dinitrogen oxide from the off-gases.
In closing, we wish to thank our colleagues at SverdNIIkhimmash for designing and fabricating the catalytic module.