<title>Cosmic ray muon computed tomography of spent nuclear fuel in dry storage	 casks</title>
<Affiliation>a.Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87544, USA
b.University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA</Affiliation>
<author>D. Poulson, J.M. Durham, E. Guardincerri, C.L. Morrisa, J.D. Bacon, K. Plaud-Ramos,
D. Morley, A.A. Hecht</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2016.10.040</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2016.10.040</URL>
ABSTRACT
Radiography with cosmic ray muon scattering has proven to be a successful method of imaging nuclear material through heavy shielding. Of particular interest is monitoring dry storage casks for diversion of plutonium contained in spent reactor fuel. Using muon tracking detectors that surround a cylindrical cask, cosmic ray muon scattering can be simultaneously measured from all azimuthal angles, giving complete tomographic coverage of the cask interior. This paper describes the ﬁrst application of ﬁltered back projection algorithms, typically used in medical imaging, to cosmic ray muon scattering imaging. The speciﬁc application to monitoring spent nuclear fuel in dry storage casks is investigated via GEANT4 simulations. With a cylindrical muon tracking detector surrounding a typical spent fuel cask, simulations indicate that missing fuel bundles can be detected with a statistical signiﬁcance of ∼18σ in less than two days exposure and a sensitivity at 1σ to a 5% missing portion of a fuel bundle. Potential detector technologies and geometries are discussed.
Keywords:
Muon radiography Tomography Cosmic rays
Dry cask storage
1.Introduction
The method of reconstructing multidimensional functions from a continuum of integrated projections at varying angles was ﬁrst discussed by Radon [1]. Applications of this technique to produce tomographic images of the interior of the human body via series of x- ray images were ﬁrst formalized by Cormack [2,3] and demonstrated by Hounsﬁeld [4] and Ambrose [5]. These computed tomography techniques were soon extended to charged particle imaging with alpha particles [6] and heavy nuclei [7] produced by particle accelerators. Here, we apply computed tomography to imaging with a natural source of charged particles: cosmic ray muons. Through simulation, we explore the technique for imaging spent nuclear fuel in dry storage casks.
Cosmic ray muons are produced by interactions of protons and nuclei from space with atoms in the upper atmosphere. Collisions of these primary cosmic rays with atmospheric gas produce showers of pions, many of which decay to muons. These muons arrive on the Earth's surface at a rate of 1/cm2/min with an average energy of 4 GeV, and an angular distribution that falls oﬀ approximately with cos2 θz, where θz is the angle from the zenith [8]. Since the ﬂux of muons is isotropic in azimuth, they form a naturally occurring probe that can be used to radiograph objects from multiple views simultaneously.
Due to their high energies, ubiquitous availability, and highly penetrating nature, comic ray muons are being explored as a tool for a variety of diﬃcult imaging scenarios [9–14]. Of particular interest to international safeguards is monitoring spent nuclear fuel that is sealed in dry storage casks to deter potential diversion to plutonium reproces- sing. These casks are heavily shielded to prevent radiation leakage to the environment, which precludes quantitative imaging using typical radiographic probes such as neutrons or photons [15]. Other methods that attempt to monitor casks by obtaining a neutron ”ﬁngerprint” can only potentially determine if the content of the cask has changed since it was ﬁrst measured [16], and are therefore only applicable to casks which were measured when the contents were deﬁnitively known by the inspection agency. Also, these measurements must apply correc- tions for changes in the neutron emission rates due to decay of ﬁssion products between measurements, and are susceptible to large back- grounds from neighboring casks that are present at spent fuel storage installations (SFSIs). Muon radiography is the only standalone method which can determine a cask's contents without any prior information. Such a standalone method would allow inspectors to obtain or recover from a loss of continuity of knowledge of the cask contents.
Simulation studies to date have used two planar tracking detectors placed on opposite sides of an object to record the trajectories of incoming and outgoing muons, and thereby determine the scattering
angle [17–22]. The ﬁrst actual muon radiography measurements on a fuel cask used two 1.2×1.2 m2 drift tube tracking detectors to measure the areal density between the two detectors, and thereby show that missing fuel assemblies can be located [23]. However, this single measurement of integrated density leaves ambiguities in the exact location of the missing fuel elements in the direction orthogonal to the two detectors.
For these large, cylindrical storage containers, a more optimal geometry is a cylindrical detector that ﬁts around the outside of the cask. In addition to increasing the detector active area (and thereby the muon counting rates), this provides simultaneous measurements of muon scattering through all azimuthal angles of the cask. With this continuum of areal density measurements, computed tomography image reconstruction algorithms can be applied to produce full images of the cask interior. A single set of planar detectors can also take data from multiple viewing angles to provide a similar coverage on a longer time scale.
This paper describes the feasibility of such a technique using GEANT4 simulations [24] of cosmic ray muons passing through a idealized cylindrical muon tracking detector around a partially loaded Westinghouse MC-10 cask [25]. A ﬁltered back-projection algorithm
[26]is used to reconstruct images of the cask interior, which shows that missing assemblies and missing portions of individual fuel assemblies can be identiﬁed without opening the cask. Similar data can also be obtained with a series of smaller muon tracking detectors that are moved around the cask. This technique could be useful for interna- tional nuclear safeguards inspectors.
2.Simulation
The GEANT4 toolkit was used to simulate muon passage through a partially loaded dry storage cask. The simulated cask and fuel assemblies were modeled after the speciﬁcations for a Westinghouse MC-10 spent fuel cask located at Idaho National Lab. The MC-10 is a vertical storage cask designed to hold 24 pressurized water reactor fuel assemblies. In the simulation, the cask is partially loaded with Westinghouse 15 × 1 pressurized water reactor fuel assemblies in 18 of the slots (see Fig. 1). An aluminum basket holds the fuel assemblies in the center of the cask, and is surrounded by a 25 cm thick forged steel wall. This is surrounded by a shell of BISCO NS-3 neutron shielding, which is covered by a stainless steel skin. Twenty four cooling ﬁns are equally spaced around the cask and facilitate heat transfer from the interior of the fuel basket to the outside. The external dimensions of the cask are 4.8 m in height by 2.7 m in diameter
(measured from the outer edge of the cooling ﬁns).
The fuel assemblies are 4 m long with a cross sectional area of 21.4×21.4 cm2, and each contains 204 fuel rods, 20 control rod guide tubes, and one instrument thimble. The fuel rods are ﬁlled with UO2 and surrounded by a zirconium alloy cladding. The control rods and instrument thimble were simulated an empty cladding, with no fuel present. The center-to-center distance between pins is 1.43 cm.
The ideal muon detectors in the simulation consist of two rings which encircle the cask. Each ring is 1.5 m high and has a radius of
1.68 m. The upper detector is separated from the lower detector by
0.5 m, and each detector is oﬀset either above or below the center of the cask by 0.25 m. To be considered in this analysis, muons are required to pass through the upper detector and be pointed at the lower detector. The detectors record the muon position and direction, and are assumed to have perfect eﬃciency and angular resolution.
For these studies, 108 muons were generated and aimed to pass through the cask. Each muon was produced with a 45% probability of being a μ+ or a 55% probability of being a μ−, with ionization, bremsstrahlung, capture, and scattering interactions considered. It was assumed that the spectrum was independent of the azimuthal angle of the muon (though in reality it is possible that adjacent casks may attenuate out lower energy muons, thus distorting the muon energy spectrum). The muon spectrum was generated from a power series ﬁt of the form f (E) = AE−α to cosmic ray muon data [8] in the upper atmosphere forcing the ﬂux to fall to 0 at 0 MeV, where f is the ﬂux at the zenith, E is the muon energy, and A and α are a ﬁtted constants. It was assumed that the initial ﬂux in the upper atmosphere was described by the ﬁt, which was then modiﬁed for diﬀerent angles oﬀ of the zenith by correcting for muon decay, attenuation, and energy loss through atmosphere that was assumed to increase linearly in density. The ﬁt was further weighted by taking into account the coverage in solid angle from each step in angle oﬀ of the zenith. The angular distribution was binned into 180 angular bins, each 0.5 degrees in width, and 2000 energy bins, each 10 MeV in width. A histogram of the muon ﬂux as a function of muon momentum and θz is shown in Fig. 2.
Limits on the sampled spectrum were enforced to produce muons which would pass through the upper ring detector, while being aimed at the lower ring detector. Only muons with an initial direction and position that satisﬁed these criteria were generated. An estimate of the simulated exposure time is possible by assuming that the change in incident ﬂux is independent of azimuthal angle and proportional to the angle oﬀ of the zenith by, df /dθ = A sin(θ)cos2 (θ). The constant A for the ﬂux may be found by integrating over all values of θ from 0 to π /2
Fig. 1. A top down view (left) and a side view (right) of the simulated cask and idealized detector geometries. The fuel assembly loading conﬁguration is shown with six fuel assembly compartments left empty.
Fig. 2. Monte Carlo cosmic ray muon momentum and angular distribution. Cosmic ray muons were generated in GEANT4 by sampling this distribution.
and forcing it to be equal to the empirically measured value of 1/cm2/ min, which gives a value of A=3/cm2/min. The solid angle coverage of the detectors is easily found from the detector geometry given above, and integration of df /dθ = 3/cm2/min sin(θ)cos2 (θ) over the solid angle will give an estimate of the expected ﬂux on an area of 1 cm2 at the center of the detector rings between the two detectors. By projecting all incident muons to the horizontal plane between the detectors and counting the number of muons which passed through a 1 cm2 area at the center of the plane, the total exposure for the 108 muon events was found to be equivalent to 1.9 days of cosmic ray muon exposure.
3.Image analysis
The detectors used in this simulation were ideal, meaning perfect angular and spatial resolution, the following discussion is for the purpose of showing the proof of process of the application of computed tomography to cosmic ray muon scattering. Cosmic ray muons generated in the simulation impinge on the cask from all azimuthal directions. The incident muons are projected down to a vertical plane, tangential to the muon track, that also passes through the center of the cask (see Fig. 4). The vertical plane is divided into 2 cm wide bins in the horizontal direction, and the scattering angle of each muon which falls within that position bin is collected in a histogram corresponding the muon's horizontal position and angle at which it impinges on the cask. The 2 cm bins were chosen since they are roughly 1% of the area of the 21.4×21.4 cm2 fuel bundles. It should also be noted that such large bins are well outside the limiting resolution of the ideal detector. Once all track's scattering angles have been assigned to a histogram, the histogram data is ﬁt with a multigroup model. The multigroup model performs a ﬁt to a scattering histogram (see Fig. 3) by assuming that the muon spectrum is composed of a limited number of muon energies. The result of this ﬁt is the number of radiation lengths that caused the scattering histogram, also referred to as the areal density. Please see
[27]for additional details. This technique produces a series of integrated areal density projections of the cask as viewed from each azimuthal angle .
Since the detectors are wrapped entirely around the cask, the
Fig. 3. One of the scattering angle histograms for this simulation with the multigroup ﬁt.
Fig. 4. The projection of the muon path (blue arrow) to the center plane of the cask. The muon scattering angle is assigned to a sinogram according to its corresponding oﬀset from the cask center (r) and rotation of the plane with respect to the cask (θ). (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
complete view of the cask's integrated density projections can be collected in a sinogram. This display of the integrated areal densities versus the azimuthal projection angle is shown in the left panel of Fig. 5.
Only the horizontal directions of the incident muon tracks deter- mine the position bin where the muon scattering angle is stored. Therefore, the reconstructed image of areal scattering densities is a projection down the center axis of the detector. There are many tools and software packages readily available to reconstruct images from sinograms, a full discussion of which is beyond the scope of this paper. Details can be found in [28,29]. In this analysis, the reconstruction of the cask image from the sinogram was performed via ﬁltered back projection with a traditional ramp ﬁlter using the RECLBL library [26]. The right panel of Fig. 5 shows the reconstructed image of the cask. It clearly shows the structures of the cask including the cooling ﬁns, steel shielding shell, and the loading conﬁguration of the fuel assemblies.
Fig. 6 shows a numbered schematic of each slot in the fuel basket along with the integrated signal at each location, which is deﬁned as the sum of the integrated areal density values contained in a
20 20 cm2 area centered at the nominal location of the assembly. An immediate distinction is apparent between the integrated signal of slots containing the fuel assemblies and those that have been left empty. The average integrated value of locations that contained assemblies was
25.8 ± 1.3 arb. units. Empty slots average an integrated signal value was 2.5 ± 1.3 arb. units. The simulation shows that 108 muon events, or
1.9 days, allows for suﬃcient exposure to distinguish between a ﬁlled and empty slot inside the cask with a statistical precision of 18σ and a sensitivity at 1σ to a 5% (1.3/25.8) missing portion of a fuel bundle.
We also study the transmission rate of muons through the cask.
Fig. 5. A sinogram (left) and its reconstructed image via ﬁltered back projection (right) of the areal density of the simulated cask, found with muon scattering.
From the simulated data set, muons which pass through the ﬁrst detector but were stopped in the cask (i.e. do not reach the second detector) were selected. Fig. 6 shows a sinogram ﬁlled using these events. The values in each bin are −ln( Nout ), where Nout is the number of tracks which pass through both the upper and lower detectors and Nin is the total number of incoming muon tracks. The reconstructed image in Fig. 7 has high intensity in the region of the steel shell, due to stopping of low energy muons, with a lower intensity in the regions of the loaded fuel assemblies. A comparison with the reconstructed scattering image in Fig. 5 shows that the transmission image is less sensitive to the fuel bundles themselves.
The diﬀerence between the scattering and transmission images reﬂects the diﬀerent mechanisms governing the muon energy loss in material (which is proportional to the ratio of a materials atomic number to mass number Z /A) and the angular distribution of scattered muons (which has a dependence on Z that is stronger than linear [8]). Since the neutron fraction (A − Z )/A generally increases for high Z elements, the proton fraction Z /A decreases, resulting in a relatively weaker signal at the UO2 fuel in the transmission image. Conversely, the stronger dependence on Z for multiple scattering increases the signal strength of for high Z material, providing a clearer scattering image of the fuel bundles.
4.Detector geometry
The size of the idealized muon tracking detector shown in Fig. 1 may limit deployability at SFSIs, and the cost may be prohibitive.
However, a smaller detector that collects data from multiple viewing angles around a single cask can provide tomographic information that is similar to the full idealized detector. Such a detector was used in a previous measurement [23], but only from one viewing angle.
With smaller upper and lower tracking detectors, the relative positions of the two planes can be changed to image diﬀerent volumes of the fuel cask (see Fig. 8). Simulations were run with two 1.2 1.2 m2 trackers placed at two, three, and four diﬀerent positions around the fuel cask. Here two positions imply that there are two locations that the upper detector may occupy and two separate positions that the lower detector may occupy. For these simulations, the upper detector was placed at one of the n positions within the range (0 , 180 ] of the circumference of the cask, while the lower detector was placed at each of the n positions in the range (180 , 360°]. Thus, the total number of data sets increased as the square of the number of positions, i.e. n2 data sets for n positions.
The simulated data sets positions were combined to ﬁll a sinogram. The resulting sinograms from each of these conﬁgurations as well as the cylindrical detector simulation are shown in Fig. 9. The top half of each of the sinograms (corresponding to viewing angles >180 ) is empty since no muons travel up from the lower detector to the top. By increasing the number of positions to allow the detector to cover all incident angles on both sides of the cask, the sinogram may be ﬁlled more completely. This is evident in Fig. 9, where the data in the sinogram is increased with the number of positions, though no full sinogram from several positions or reconstructions are included here. Future work will focus on image reconstruction from partial sinogram
Fig. 6. The numbering scheme (left) of the fuel assemblies (red boxes indicate an empty slot) and the associated integrated signal for each slot (right).
Fig. 7. A sinogram (left) and its reconstructed image via ﬁltered back projection (right) of the muon attenuation −ln ( Nout ) within the cask.
in
data.
5.Technology options
Many diﬀerent technology options for tracking charged particles are currently in use and can be adapted for cosmic ray muon tomography. However, the radiation environment at SFSIs and operational concerns regarding deployability as a safeguards instrument place signiﬁcant constraints on detector requirements for dry cask imaging. Here we brieﬂy comment on several possible muon detector technology choices as they pertain to cask monitoring.
Silicon-based tracking detectors are in use at most large collider experiments, and provide precision charged particle tracking with single hit position resolution better than 30 µm [30–33]. While individual sensors typically have active areas of a few tens of cm2, they can be arranged to cover tens of square meters in cylindrical or ﬂat panel geometries; however, the channel count and subsequent cost of readout electronics is signiﬁcant for large applications. The high density electronics also require active liquid cooling in most cases, and transportation of a cooling system along with the detector in the ﬁeld may not be feasible. In addition, silicon detectors have well-known susceptibilities to radiation damage [34,35], and may deteriorate quickly in the signiﬁcant neutron and gamma ﬂux present at SFSIs.
Plastic scintillators are a common charged particle detector with fast rise times and high eﬃciency. Muon scattering tomography has been demonstrated with a tracker made of scintillating bars coupled to
photomultiplier tubes, giving an intrinsic hit position resolution of
2.5 mm [36]. Layers of scintillating ﬁbers are also being explored for muon imaging nuclear waste storage vessels [37]. In the radiation environment at a spent fuel storage installation, these detectors may suﬀer from their sensitivities to both neutrons and gamma rays. The exact rates that can be tolerated depend on the detector geometry, radiation levels around the cask, and electronics timing. Readout with silicon photomultipliers is becoming increasingly common, but these devices also suﬀer from radiation damage and are subject to dramatic changes in gain and dark rate noise with temperature ﬂuctuations that may occur at outdoor sites [38].
Gas-based tracking detectors, such as wire chambers or drift tubes, have been used in large particle physics experiments for decades [39,40]. As much of the active volume is gas, these detectors have a relatively low density and are therefore comparatively insensitive to the neutral radiation from the cask, while still retaining high eﬃciency for charged particles. The single hit position resolution is typically around several hundred microns. Several groups have used drift chambers [41] and drift tubes [42,43] in the laboratory. In practical terms, drift chambers with open volumes between anode wires are subject to electrical shorts when wires break and wrap around intact wires, which can be of concern when transporting chambers to and around SFSIs. Drift tubes have individualized detector elements that can be arranged in planar or cylindrical geometries, eliminating interference between channels. We note here that the only measurement of muon scattering radiography on an actual fuel cask successfully used drift tube detectors
Fig. 8. Simulated small detector composed of two planar trackers to measure incident and exiting muon tracks. The lower detector on the right image is rotated by 90° from that of the left image to image a diﬀerent volume of the cask.
Fig. 9. Sinograms from two, three, and four small detector positions, and for the cylindrical detector (left to right).
[23].
6.Summary
For the ﬁrst time, the application of computed tomography algo- rithms to image reconstruction using cosmic ray muon scattering has been studied. GEANT4 simulations of muon imaging of a partially loaded dry storage cask show that missing fuel assemblies can be located with high conﬁdence in less than two days, using a detector which completely surrounds the cask. The diversion of spent fuel assemblies can therefore be determined without opening the cask, on a time scale that is well within the International Atomic Energy Agency timeliness goals. Alternatively, a set of smaller detectors can be moved around the cask to generate tomographic information from multiple viewing angles. This technique and a dedicated instrument could be a useful tool for international nuclear safeguards inspectors.
Acknowledgements
This work is funded by the National Nuclear Security Administration's Oﬃce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Research & Development. We thank Philip Winston of Idaho National Laboratory and Arden Dougan of NA-22 for useful discus- sions.
