<title>A Preliminary Economic Assessment of Thorium- Based Fuels in a Pressure Tube Heavy Water Reactor</title>
<author>Alberto D. Mendoza España, Megan Moore, Ashlea V. Colton & Blair P. Bromley</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>Canadian Nuclear Laboratories, 286 Plant Road, Chalk River, Ontario, Canada</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2018.1424431</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2018.1424431</URL>
Abstract — The fueling unit energy cost of various thorium-based fuels and uranium-based fuels aug- mented by small amounts of thorium in a pressure tube heavy water reactor (PT-HWR) are assessed building upon previous studies. The results suggests that fuel concepts using slightly enriched uranium augmented by thorium and thorium mixed with low-enriched uranium can be cost competitive and have the greatest potential for near-term implementation in PT-HWRs. Thorium-based fuels that contain small amounts of recycled plutonium or 233U will require more effort to identify and develop technologies to reduce the costs of reprocessing and fabrication for these fuels. However, as an alternative nuclear fuel for reliable and sustainable low-carbon electrical energy generation, all thorium-based fuels are competitive for both short-term and long-term implementation.
Keywords — Fuel cycle cost, thorium-based fuel, heavy water reactor.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Over the last several decades, research and develop- ment institutions such as Atomic Energy of Canada Limited (AECL) and now Canadian Nuclear Laboratories (CNL) have evaluated various thorium-based fuel concepts for use in once-through thorium (OTT) fuel cycles that could be cost competitive with the once-through natural uranium (NU) fuel cycle in a pressure tube heavy water reactor (PT-HWR), which uses heavy water as a coolant and moderator.1–3 Since the once-through NU fuel cycle is currently used in Canada, it is the reference case.
The fuel cycle activities of the once-through NU fuel cycle in Canada are mining, milling, refining, fuel fabrication, storage, and permanent disposal, which are illustrated  in Fig. 1 (Ref. 4). In this fuel cycle, no fuel enrichment is required when deployed in a PT-HWR. Because of their excellent neutron economy and online refueling capability, PT-HWRs (Fig. 2) (Ref. 5) are well suited for using other types of fuels and fuel cycles, including recovered uranium
(RU), slightly enriched uranium (SEU), uranium-based fuels augmented by small amount of thorium, and various thorium- based fuels. For more background information and details on the use of the NU fuel cycle in PT-HWRs, one may refer to Refs. 5 and 6.
The work on OTT fuel cycles has continued and evolved with recent studies,7 which considered the safety, fuel perfor- mance, and economics of various fuel concepts with small amounts of thorium added to uranium-based fuels, in com- parison to the NU fuel concept that is used currently in operating PT-HWRs. An important result from the  study was that a SEU fuel concept with small amounts of thorium added could have a lower front-end fuel cost than NU.
To expand upon the initial assessments,7 this paper reports   on   the   estimated   fueling    unit    energy    cost (in dollars per megawatt electric year) for various thorium- based fuel concepts. The fuel concepts and reactor character- istics are provided in Sec. II. In Sec. III, the fuel cycle cost equations and results are discussed. Section IV discusses the implications and options for recycled fuels. Section V dis-cusses the significance of the results, while Sec. VI provides a summary of the results.
Fig. 1. Once-through natural uranium fuel cycle in PT-HWR.
Fig. 2. Illustration of a PT-HWR.
II.FUEL CONCEPT AND REACTOR CHARACTERISTICS
This section describes fuel bundle concepts and reactor characteristics, which are similar to those of a 37-element NU fuel bundle used currently in 700-MW (electric)–class PT-HWRs (Refs. 6 and 7).
II.A. Fuel Concept Characteristics
The fuel concepts studied consist of modifications to fuel composition, central element materials, and the addition of thorium dioxide.7 Three types of fuel  bundle concepts were assessed in calculating  fuel  cycle costs: BUNDLE-37 (B37), BUNDLE-37-mod (B37mod), and BUNDLE-35 (B35), which are described in more detail elsewhere.7–10 Each fuel bun- dle is associated with different lattice concepts, which are described in  Table  I  and  shown  in  Figs.  3,  4, and 5.
Each lattice concept in Table I had varying amounts of uranium, RU (which is treated as 0.95 wt% 235U/U), SEU (1.2 wt% 235U/U), low-enriched uranium (LEU) (which is treated as 5.0 wt% 235U/U), thorium, plutonium, and 233U, with the balance of heavy metal being thorium. All the fuel was in oxide form.
The earlier study7 evaluated lattice concepts LC-01, LC-02, LC-04b, and LC-05b, which were uranium-  based fuels augmented by small amounts of thorium mixed into the end regions and also used in the central fuel pin. Lattice concepts LC-04b and LC-05b in Table I are slightly different from those previously characterized,7 which assumed the mass equivalent of 0.5-cm-long thorium end pellets. Another lattice con- cept not listed here was LC-03, which was a 37-element
TABLE I
Lattice  Concept Description
Fig. 3. BUNDLE-37 fuel bundle (LC-01 and LC-02).
fuel bundle made of pure ThO2 and is intended to be  used as blanket fuel in a seed/blanket PT-HWR core. However, this study involves the economic assessment
Fig. 4. BUNDLE-37-mod fuel bundle (LC-04b and LC-05b).
of fuels to be used in once-through fuel cycles in homo- geneous PT-HWR cores. Thus, the  lattice  concept LC-03 is not considered further.
Fig. 5. BUNDLE-35 fuel bundle (LC-06b to LC-15b).
The updated study is more conservative in that slightly more thorium (the mass equivalent of a 1-cm length of ThO2 at each  end of the  fuel bundle)  is used  in the fuels (with the exception of lattice concepts LC-01 and LC-02) as shown in Table I; see other discussion7 for further details. The updated lattice concepts with the slightly higher thorium content in the end regions are labeled LC-XXb, where “XX” is the lattice concept num- ber and “b” indicates the use of the higher thorium con- tent. The slightly larger ThO2 content will lead to higher neutron capture and lower fuel reactivity, leading to slightly lower exit fuel burnup and an expected higher fuel cost per unit of energy generated.
II.B. Reactor Characteristics
A number of general operational characteristics for 700-MW(electric)–class PT-HWRs are specified  in  Table II (Refs. 6 and 11). The general core concept is a homogeneous core (Fig. 6). In a homogeneous core, all fuel is seed fuel. Other operational and performance
TABLE II
PT-HWR Characteristics
characteristics, such as reactor thermal power level and exit burnup associated with specific fuel and core con- cepts, are shown in Table III.
III.FUELING UNIT ENERGY COST
This section presents fuel cycle costs, which consist of front-end and back-end fuel costs, for the 14 different fuel bundle concepts presented in Sec. II.
III.A.Formula
The cost calculations are based on the fueling unit  energy cost5 (measured in dollars per megawatt hour) formula:
@1
where
E = electrical energy generation per year [MW (electric)·h/yr]
cj = unit cost associated with the j’th fuel cycle activity (for example, the price of mining NU)
qj = amount of an input used for the j’th fuel cycle activity (for example, uranium mined)
and 30 represents the expected number of years of elec- trical energy generation. Equation (1) does not assume discounting. The yearly electrical energy generated is calculated by Eq. (2):
@2
where
ε = net thermal-to-electricity conversion efficiency
Pth = reactor thermal power level
cf = capacity factor.
Equation (1) was calculated using the Fuel Cycle Cost Estimator spreadsheet-based tool recently developed at CNL for heavy water reactors, which was developed to provide a high-level economic estimate of the complete fuel cycle, from cradle to grave, for different advanced reactor fuels, having the capability to analyze fuels con- taining any mixture of enriched/natural/reprocessed ura- nium, thorium, and (or) plutonium.12 Calculations using this tool assume a fuel cycle at a steady state.12
Fig. 6.  Channel layout of homogeneous PT-HWR core with 380 fuel channels.
III.B.Unit Cost Assumptions
Cost parameters used to calculate fuel cycle costs for the various fuel concepts are shown in Table IV. Some of the issues associated with the derivation and use of the cost parameters are discussed as follows.
Unit cost assumptions for each stage of the nuclear fuel cycle were primarily from Refs. 13 and 14; other sources used for identifying cost parameters are noted in Table IV. In all cases, the cost parameters provided by the sources in Table IV were adjusted for inflation. In addi- tion, in cases in which the original costs were in a foreign currency, the costs were also converted to 2015 Canadian dollars.
A challenge in using the data from several sources in Table IV is that some of the cost data do not have a breakdown of the unit cost. Future studies may consider alternative sources in order to find a breakdown of costs and identify ways of reducing fuel cycle costs. Two more associated challenges are finding publicly available data and keeping track of the assumptions used in unit costs.13 Another related issue is that some cost assumptions can- not be verified since a fuel concept has yet to be com- mercially developed, such as for RU. The cost of RU is assumed to be the cost for the reprocessing that will
produce RU since RU is a product of reprocessing used nuclear fuel (UNF).
A future study will need to address some of the issues with calculating average values, as is the case for the values of conversion, NU fabrication, and fresh Th with Pu fabrication. For example, the conversion value depicted in Table IV is an average of the cost of convert- ing U3O8 to UO2 and U3O8 to UF6. This choice of cost affects the fuel cycle costs of all uranium-based fuels augmented by small amounts of thorium (LC-02,  LC-04b, and LC-05b) and (LEU,Th)O2 fuels (LC-10b, LC-11b, LC-12b, and LC-13b). The selection of conver- sion costs is limited by the Fuel Cycle Cost Estimator,  which in its current version selects only one conversion cost.  Similar  limitations   exist   in   other   studies.13–18 A future fuel cycle cost study should consider more appropriate conversion costs.
Based on the studies,13,14 the cost for converting  U3O8 to UF6 is estimated to be lower than the cost for converting U3O8 to UO2. The lower cost associated with converting U3O8 to UF6 is likely the result of the scale of manufacturing capacity for converting U3O8 to UF6 being larger than for converting U3O8 to UO2. For example, Cameco  has  a  conversion  facility  with  a  capacity  of
15.3 million kg U/yr (Ref. 19). The amount of capacity
TABLE III
Reactor Core Concepts, Power, and  Burnup
TABLE IV
Unit Costs Used for Fuel Cycle Activities
dedicated to converting U3O8 to UF6 is 12.5 million kg U/yr, while the amount of capacity dedicated to convert- ing U3O8 to UO2 is 2.8 million kg U/yr (Refs. 19 and 20). Therefore, it is likely that fuel cycle costs for lattice concepts LC-05b, LC-10b, LC-11b,  LC-12b,  and LC-13b would be lower than the fuel cycle costs shown  in Figs. 7, 8, and 9.
A final challenge for a future study is to identify in more detail the reprocessing facilities whose work flows are capable of reprocessing the 233U and plutonium-based fuel concepts that have been considered in this paper. These types of reprocessing facilities can have an impact on the values used in calculating fuel cycle costs. For example, the value for reprocessing in Table IV is based on a uranium/tributylphosphate extraction (UREX+) process.13 According to Shropshire et al.,13 a co-extrac- tion (Co-Ex) reprocessing plant is estimated to be more economical. However, Cashmore and Koppelman21 claim that a plutonium and uranium recovery by extraction (PUREX) process is more economical, and a more mature technology, than both a Co-Ex and a UREX+ process.
III.C.Used Fuel Assumptions
The fuel concepts that contain either (Pu,Th)O2 (LC-06b, LC-07b, LC-08b, and  LC-09b) or  (233U,Th)O2
(LC-14b and LC-15b) will not require any direct use of future NU extraction, assuming that there are sufficient stockpiles of irradiated uranium [from spent light water reactor (LWR) fuel, or perhaps even irradiated NU fuel
from PT-HWRs, or fast breeder reactors], or stockpiles of irradiated thorium (obtained from either thermal or fast spectrum reactors, including breeding reactors). It is recognized that this simplifying assumption may be somewhat misleading given that plutonium must come originally from irradiated uranium and 233U must come from a uranium and thorium–based fuel.
The results assume that 233U is based on the UNF from the fuel concept LC-05b, and the composition of the UNF is provided in Table V. The source of the stockpile for the plutonium-based fuel concepts is UNF from LWRs, and the composition of the UNF is provided in Table V.
III.D.Results
Fuel cycle cost results are illustrated in Fig. 7 (total), Fig. 8 (back end), Fig. 9 (front end), Fig. 10 (front-end components), and Fig. 11 (back-end components).
Lattice concept LC-01, which uses NU in a PT-HWR, was considered the reference case for comparison, with a total fuel cost of $11.59/MW(electric)·h. The most cost- competitive lattice concepts (Fig. 7) are those based on the use of uranium-based fuels augmented by small amounts of thorium (LC-04b and LC-05b), and the LEU/Th fuels (LC-10b, LC-11b, LC-12b, and LC-13b), which have total costs ranging from $10.75/MW(electric)·h to $14.78/MW (electric)·h.
Only the lattice concept LC-05b (SEU+Th) had a lower total fueling unit energy cost than the reference
Fig. 7. Total fuel costs.
Fig. 8.  Back-end  fuel costs.
Fig. 9.  Front-end  fuel costs.
case  LC-01  (NU).  The  back-end  fuel  cycle  costs  (Fig. 8) were slightly higher by approximately 0.5%, though the front-end fuel cycle costs (Fig. 9) were sufficiently lower than the reference case to enable improved economics.
Lattice concepts LC-05b, LC-11b, and LC-12b oper- ated at slightly higher electrical power levels [~2061 MW (thermal)] than the reference case [~1958 MW(thermal)]. The lower power level for the reference case (and a number of other lattice concepts) was due to the require- ment of slight derating, to avoid exceeding bundle and
channel power limits, based on computational reactor physics modeling results. However, it is known and recognized that a more realistic core model would include the use and explicit modeling of various reactivity devices that would help flatten the axial and  radial  power distributions, to enable the reactor to operate at full power [2061 MW(thermal)].
The thorium-based lattice concepts involving the use of recycled fuel (either Pu or 233U) had significantly higher total fuel costs, ranging from ~$62/MW(electric)·h to $84/MW(electric)·h. As will be discussed below, these
Fig. 10. Front-end component fuel costs.
significantly higher costs are attributed to the front-end costs.
III.E.Front-End Fuel Cost Components
The components of the front-end fuel costs are  shown in Fig. 10. The main conclusion from these results is that all the lattice concepts LC-05b, LC-11b, LC-12b, and LC-13b have lower fuel fabrication costs than the reference case (LC-01). This result is attributable to each of these lattice concepts having a higher burnup than the reference case since a lattice concept with a higher burnup consumes less fuel annually. In  addition,  only the lattice concept LC-05b had lower conversion and uranium mined costs than the reference case. The lattice concept LC-12b had a conversion cost equal to that of the reference case, while the cost of mined uranium was slightly lower than the reference case by 0.34%.
However, higher burnup does not always guarantee   a lower front-end fuel cost, as is the case with the LEU/Th fuels (LC-10b,  LC-11b,  LC-12b,  and  LC-13b), the (Pu,Th)O2 fuels  (LC-06b,  LC-07b, LC-08b, and LC-09b), and the (233U,Th)O2  fuels (LC-14b and LC-15b).
In the case of lattice  concepts  LC-11b,  LC-12b,  and LC-13b, the economic advantages gained  from  lower fuel fabrication costs relative to the  reference  were more than offset by the added  costs  of  thorium and enrichment.
In the cases of (Pu,Th)O2 and (233U,Th)O2 fuels, the Pu or 233U require reprocessing of stockpiles of irradiated uranium-based or thorium-based fuels prior to fabricating either (Pu,Th)O2 or (233U,Th)O2 fuel types. The added cost of reprocessing and fabrication is found to be sig- nificantly larger than the cost savings achieved through higher fuel burnups and the avoidance of the use of  mined uranium.
Fuel fabrication costs for either (Pu,Th)O2 or (233U,Th)O2  fuel  types  are  higher  than  fabricating  NU, primarily because fabrication and reprocessing facilities for either (Pu,Th)O2 or  (233U,Th)O2  use  remote methods of handling  fuel  due  to  radioactivity  of the elements in the fuel.13 Historically,  fabrication  and some reprocessing facilities had a relatively small throughput capacity in addition to  using  remote-  handled methods.22–24 In addition,  existing  reproces- sing facilities have been used typically at low capacity.25–27
III.F.Back-End Fuel Cost Components
The components of the back-end fuel costs are  shown in Fig. 11. The main result is that the lattice concept LC-01 had a lower  back-end  cost  than  all  other lattice concepts. Van Den Durpel et al.28 observed that a higher burnup may be a way of reducing back-end financial risk. This strategy seems to hold true for lattice concepts LC-04b, LC-05b, LC-10b, LC-11b, LC-12b,  and LC-13b, which have a back-end fuel cost ranging from about 0.5% to 14% higher than the reference case (LC-01). On the other hand, lattice concepts LC-06b to LC-09b, LC-14b, and LC-15b have back-end fuel costs ranging from approximately 27% to 316% higher than  the reference case. Thus, there are lattice concepts with    a higher burnup that can potentially provide back-end fuel costs that are relatively competitive with that of NU and have relatively low back-end financial risk.
The main reason for the higher back-end costs for lattice concepts LC-04b through LC-15b relative to the reference case (NU) is that the reference case does not require dry storage. For some of these lattice concepts, however, the added cost from dry storage requirements was partially offset by waste conditioning and UNF disposal costs, which for some of the lattice concepts were lower than the reference case. In the case of wet storage, all the lattice concepts (LC-04b through LC-15b) had a lower cost than the reference case. The wet storage cost was lower for these lattice concepts since these lattice concepts required less annual fuel consumption relative to the reference case. The assumption of the reference case not using dry storage is a bit limited when applied to reality, for instance, Canada’s current fuel cycle. In Canada, most UNF is stored in wet storage, but it is pending transfer to interim dry storage.29 After dry storage, the used fuel is expected to be transferred to a deep geological repository30,31 (DGR). A future study is required to consider the addition of dry storage. The addition of dry storage to the reference case would likely raise the cost for the reference case and make other lattice concepts, especially lattice concepts LC-04b, LC-05b, LC-10b, LC-11b, LC-12b, and LC-13b,
more cost competitive.
IV.IMPLICATIONS AND OPTIONS FOR RECYCLED FUELS
Unless the cost of mined NU increases signifi- cantly [for example, range of $200/kg  to  $300/kg (Ref. 32)], it will be necessary to develop improved
Fig. 11. Back-end component fuel costs.
technologies and processes that can significantly reduce the costs of reprocessing and fabrication for (Pu,Th)O2 and (233U,Th)O2 fuels, which make use of recycled Pu or 233U. Suggested areas for further investigation include the following:  (1)  reliability (and  design)  of  plants25–27;  (2)  alternative  methods of processing such as the direct use of spent pressur- ized water reactor (PWR) fuel in CANDU (Ref. 17);
(3) alternative fuels that eliminate an aspect of the front-end fuel cost such as RU fuel, which eliminates reenrichment33; (4) different fuel management strategies34; (5) different technologies for incorpora- tion into the design of a plant, such as an “α-cavern concept rather than glove boxes.”35
Alternatively, it may be useful to consider other fuel concepts and associated reactor systems (synergies36) that could reduce or circumvent the need for reprocessing and refabrication of recycled fuel. An example would be to take irradiated blanket fuel (made of fertile thorium and/ or depleted uranium) from a fast spectrum reactor system with sufficiently high fissile content (2 wt% to 3 wt% fissile Pu or 233U) and use it directly in a PT-HWR without reprocessing or refabrication.37 Of course, such an approach would have different technical issues to address and economic assessments to be evaluated.
V.UNCERTAINTIES AND TOTAL ENERGY COSTS
In the analyses performed in this study, the nom-  inal fuel cycle costs considered showed that  SEU+Th and LEU/Th fuels are economically competitive  with  NU and could be implemented in the short term. In contrast, thorium-based fuels containing recycled Pu or 233U appear to have significantly larger front-end fuel costs than NU based on current technologies and indus- trial capacity for reprocessing and  recycling.  Thus,  other factors would need to be  considered  to  help  justify the use of  (Pu,Th)O2  or  (233U,Th)O2  in  the  short term until fuel costs can be brought down through technology innovation and economies  of  scale.  Two  key factors to consider are the total power generation costs (in addition to fuel) and uncertainties in current cost estimates.
V.A. Implications of Uncertainties
Recently, the levelized fuel cycle cost for a once- through    cycle    in    a    PWR    was    estimated    to  be
5.94 ± 0.67 mills/kW·h and for a thermal reactor recycle [using   reprocessing   and   fabrication   of   mixed  oxide
(MOX) fuel] was 6.13 ± 0.55 mills/kW·h (Ref. 38).  Thus, the fuel cycle cost of the recycled fuel is approxi- mately 3% larger, with a 9% uncertainty. The results38 suggest that two options (enriched uranium versus MOX) have comparable costs, with MOX being higher by 3% to 12%. The results may also imply that the cost estimates used in this study for reprocessing and recycling of Pu or 233U may be highly pessimistic or conservative. Thus, further investigation may be required to obtain more accurate and realistic estimates for the costs of reproces- sing and recycling Pu and 233U. By comparison, the studies reported here give a value of $5.60/MW(elec- tric)·h (or 5.6 mills/kW·h) for the front-end fuel cost for NU fuel, which is very comparable to that of the enriched fuel used in a PWR (Ref. 38).
V.B. Fuel Costs Relative to Total Energy Costs and Comparison with Other Low-Carbon Power Sources
Although alternative thorium-based nuclear fuels such as (Pu,Th)O2 or (233U,Th)O2 may have larger fuel costs than NU, it may still be economically feasible to use such fuels in the near term to produce electricity given that fuel costs are a fraction of the total electrical energy costs. In addition, the use of (Pu,Th)O2 or (233U,Th)O2 fuels in a PT-HWR may be more economically attractive than alternative sources of low-carbon electricity.
Based on Ontario Power Generation’s most recent nuclear performance benchmarking results, fuel costs as a percentage of the total electricity generating cost for a PT-HWR are approximately 8.4% to 13.6% (Ref. 39). Based on the data shown in Fig. 7, the fuel costs for (Pu,Th)O2 fuel could be a factor of ~7.3 = 84.1/11.6 larger than that for NU. If a factor of 7.3 is assumed and fuel costs are 13.6% of total unit electrical energy costs, then the use of a plutonium-based fuel with thorium may lead to an increase of ~85% in total unit cost of generating electrical energy than by using NU. Although such an increase in cost would be less competitive in the short term than using NU or SEU+Th, or LEU/Th fuels, it might be competitive with alternative forms of low-carbon power generation.
A recent Ontario Energy Board electricity price report indicates that the total generation unit cost for nuclear energy is 6.8 ¢/kW·h [$68/MW(electric)·h] compared to
14.0 ¢/kW·h estimated for natural gas, 13.3 ¢/kW·h for wind, 48.1 ¢/kW·h for solar, and 13.0 ¢/kW·h for bioenergy.40 Thus, if an 85% increase is applied to nuclear power costs due to the use of (Pu,Th)O2 fuel, then the nuclear power  costs will be  ~12.6 ¢/kW·h, which is  still a lower cost than the alternatives and also has the added benefit of being a reliable baseload source of power. While it is possible that various energy storage technologies could improve the effective capacity factors of intermittent low-carbon sources of energy (such as wind and solar/ photovoltaics), it is expected that such energy storage technologies would drive up their respective total costs. Thus, a plutonium/thorium-based fuel (or even a 233U/Th fuel) in a PT-HWR could lead to lower-cost low-carbon electrical energy than alternatives such as wind, solar, or perhaps even natural gas or bioenergy.
Given worldwide concerns with the environmental consequences from generating electrical energy,23 it would seem prudent to continue considering both the short-term and long-term implementation of thorium- based fuels to complement the use of uranium-based fuels, especially when considering existing uncertainties in cost estimates and taking into account relative costs  compared to alternative sources of low-carbon power generation. For example,  recent estimates16 suggest that  a PT-HWR with either NU or thorium-based fuel would offer significant savings on the abatement costs for the production of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in comparison to both coal-fired and natural gas–fired electrical power generation.
VI.CONCLUSION
The analyses documented in this paper compared 14 lattice concepts in terms of fueling unit energy cost. Lattice concepts using uranium-based fuels mixed with small amounts of thorium or LEU mixed with significant amounts of thorium had fueling unit energy costs that were comparable to or lower than that for NU. Thorium- based lattice concepts using recycled Pu or 233U had significantly larger fueling unit energy costs.
The lattice concept with SEU+Th (LC-05b) was esti- mated to have a more economical fueling unit energy cost than conventional NU fuel (LC-01), with total fuel costs that were approximately 7.25% lower. This type of fuel concept has the greatest potential for implementation in PT-HWRs in the near term. Further refinements of the economic assessments should be carried out for these concepts, such as uncertainty and discounting.
For instance, there was no sensitivity study performed a priori to determine that the 1.2 wt% 235U/U fuel + trace thorium was the lowest-cost option, though it is known from previous research and studies5,6 that  an enrichment of ~1.2 wt% 235U/U will maximize the uranium utilization [MW(electric)·days/kg NU mined] for fuel in a
conventional PT-HWR. Thus, for the new study reported here, it was decided a priori to use 1.2 wt% 235U/U SEU mixed with small amounts of thorium (2 cm in the end regions, and a central thorium pin) as a sample case to evaluate and compare with other lattice concepts. A future study is needed to address the potential for errors due to, for instance, the cost of enriched uranium.
It is apparent that greater effort will be required to identify and develop technologies to reduce the costs of recycling (Pu,Th)O2 and (233U,Th)O2 fuels. Further stu- dies will be required to quantify more accurately the various fuel cost components and to quantify potential nonfuel cost savings. However, even with larger fuel costs, it is apparent that (Pu,Th)O2 and  (233U,Th)O2  could still be used to produce electricity at costs that are competitive with alternative electrical energy sources such as wind, solar, natural gas, and bioenergy.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance pro- vided by S. Sell, J. Festarini, M. Leblanc, D. Hoover, T.  Wright, S. Scott, R. Dennis, S. Gimson, A. Nava-Dominguez,
H. Hanke, D. Wojtaszek, and G. W. R. Edwards. This study was funded by AECL, under the auspices of the Federal Nuclear Science and Technology Program.
