<title>Design and performance of A 3He-free coincidence counter based on parallel plate boron-lined proportional technology</title>
<Affiliation>Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA</Affiliation>
<author>D. Henzlova n, H.O. Menlove, J.B. Marlow</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2015.02.050</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2015.02.050</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Thermal neutron counters utilized and developed for deployment as non-destructive assay (NDA) instruments in the ﬁeld of nuclear safeguards traditionally rely on 3He-based proportional counting systems. 3He-based proportional counters have provided core NDA detection capabilities for several decades and have proven to be extremely reliable with range of features highly desirable for nuclear facility deployment. Facing the current depletion of 3He gas supply and the continuing uncertainty of options for future resupply, a search for detection technologies that could provide feasible short-term alternative to 3He gas was initiated worldwide. As part of this effort, Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) designed and built a 3He-free full scale thermal neutron coincidence counter based on boron- lined proportional technology. The boron-lined technology was selected in a comprehensive inter- comparison exercise based on its favorable performance against safeguards speciﬁc parameters. This paper provides an overview of the design and initial performance evaluation of the prototype High Level Neutron counter—Boron (HLNB). The initial results suggest that current HLNB design is capable to provide ~80% performance of a selected reference 3He-based coincidence counter (High Level Neutron Coincidence Counter, HLNCC). Similar samples are expected to be measurable in both systems, however, slightly longer measurement times may be anticipated for large samples in HLNB. The initial evaluation helped to identify potential for further performance improvements via additional tailoring of boron- layer thickness.
Keywords:
Boron-lined proportional counter
3He replacement Coincidence counting
1.Introduction
In order to prevent proliferation and clandestine use of special nuclear material (SNM) located in nuclear facilities worldwide safeguards instruments are deployed and used by the International Atomic Energy Inspectorate (IAEA) for material accountancy and veriﬁcation purposes. The key technique for non-destructive assay (NDA) of SNM relies on detection of correlated neutrons, where pairs or higher order neutron coincidences are detected to provide a direct signature of nuclear ﬁssions within the item. In order to accurately quantify the amount of SNM, high neutron detection efﬁciency is required to allow for simultaneous detection of multiple neutron events. To accommodate this requirement, nuclear safe- guards instruments that employ correlated detection of thermal neutrons traditionally utilize 3He gas-ﬁlled proportional counters embedded in high density polyethylene (HDPE). Counters based on 3He proportional technology are in routine use in nuclear fuel cycle facilities including fuel fabrication plants, bulk plutonium handling facilities, and storage sites worldwide. During the past decade, the production of 3He gas signiﬁcantly declined primarily due to reduction of nuclear weapons stockpile and was anticipated to no longer support the projected demand [1,2]. The decreased  supply and continuing uncertainty of options for future resupply prompted worldwide intense R&D to develop and evaluate detection technol- ogies that could provide feasible alternative to 3He gas in the near future [3]. Several alternative detection technologies have been developed over the past few years and became commercially available. The techniques include scintillation  materials  with 6Li or 10B compounds [4–7], liquid scintillators for fast neutron detection [8,9], and variety of designs of boron-lined proportional counters [10–12]. The latter belong among the most extensively considered 3He-free technologies for near-term application in the  ﬁeld  of nuclear safeguards due to the high thermal neutron reaction cross- section  of  10B  (3836  barns  at  thermal  neutron  energy,   72%   of 3He value), reliability and stability associated with the use of well- established proportional detection technology  and  compatibility with the existing electronics infrastructure.
In order for any detection technology to be viable for routine use in nuclear safeguards, its performance characteristics essential for SNM assay need to be evaluated and compared with a suitable 3He-based reference. Over decades of their deployment at nuclear facilities, the 3He-based counters demonstrated extraordinary performance characteristics desirable for routine use. High efﬁ- ciency, excellent long term stability, high mean-time-between- failure and thus low maintenance requirements are among the key technology features. Similar characteristics pose ambitious perfor- mance requirements on any 3He-free detection technology. To provide a consistent performance evaluation platform, Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) developed an integrated test program for evaluation of 3He-free technologies for nuclear safeguards use [13]. The test program was formulated based on safeguards speciﬁc requirements derived from decades of experience with 3He-based neutron counters. Several commercially available boron- lined proportional technologies in form of single detector modules were experimentally evaluated within this test program. In addition to this evaluation, for any technology to be deployable and satisfy challenging requirements of nuclear facilities, attributes speciﬁc to design and implementation of a full scale counter need to be considered. Comparison of these attributes with an equivalent 3He-based system is essential in order to assess possible application space of a given technology. Such comparison includes not only the full counter performance, but also additional design features such as size, robustness and compatibility with existing data acquisition infrastructure.
The evaluation of single detector modules against safeguards
parameters at LANL provided input for selection of the most viable boron-lined technology in the context of nuclear safeguards. The technology was then used to design and build a full scale prototype 3He-free neutron coincidence counter to be evaluated in side-by-side comparison with an existing 3He-based counter. For the purpose of direct comparison, the design features of the boron-based coincidence counter were derived from an existing 3He-based High Level Neutron Coincidence Counter (HLNCC-II) [14] that represents a working standard in broad use within  the nuclear  safeguards  ﬁeld as well as  in routine inspections performed by the IAEA. The design speciﬁca- tions and comparison with HLNCC is presented in this paper. The full scale boron-based counter provides a direct insight into the scalability of the selected 3He-free detection technology into a typical safeguards system. In addition to experimental performance  evaluation,  the newly built counter serves as a test-system to evaluate  aspects relevant for user experience, facility deployment and compatibility  with electronics infrastructure.
2.Physics design of boron-based safeguards counter
The boron-lined technology selected for the design and build of a full scale neutron coincidence counter (High Level Neutron counter—Boron, HLNB) is manufactured by Precision Data Tech- nology, Inc. (PDT) and represents a rectangular detector module consisting of boron-lined parallel plate detection chambers. Single detector module is comprised of six narrow boron-lined detection chambers interleaved with HDPE plates. Additional HPDE layer surrounds the detector case for optimum neutron moderation. The interleaved design as well as large surface area coated with 10B allows achieving sufﬁcient thermal neutron  detection  efﬁciency  for correlated counting purposes. The PDT detector technology was selected for a full scale coincidence counter build based on its performance in a comprehensive experimental evaluation against safeguards speciﬁc requirements [13,6]. Photograph of the PDT detector module is shown in Fig. 1 (left) with a schematic cross- section illustrating the internal structure (right).
To provide a viable alternative the full scale neutron coincidence counter needs to be designed to provide similar performance as a 3He-based equivalent system, while preserving the compact  design and satisfying application requirements. The compact design is Fig. 1. Single PDT detector module (left), schematic cross-section of the PDT module (right).
necessary for operator accessibility and sample insertion. In addition, weight of the counter should be kept low to allow its portability or simple transportation. To satisfy this requirement, the design para- meters of the newly designed full scale boron-based coincidence counter were derived from a typical 3He-based neutron coincidence counter. A High-Level Neutron Coincidence Counter (HLNCC-II) was selected for this purpose, since it represents nuclear safeguards standard ﬁelded in numerous nuclear  facilities  and  routinely  used by the IAEA inspectorate. In the context of nuclear safeguards, the performance of a neutron coincidence counter is typically character- ized by a ﬁgure-of-merit, FOM, deﬁned as [3,15]:
@1
here ε denotes the neutron detection efﬁciency and τ represents the neutron die-away time. The neutron die-away time is one of the key system parameters in nuclear safeguards as it refers to neutron lifetime in the detection system before it gets detected, or absorbed, or leaks out of the system. Thermal neutron coincidence counters
typically exhibit die-away times of 10–100 ms [16]. As can  be  seen from Eq. (1) shorter die-away time values are desirable to maximize
the FOM. The FOM deﬁnition in Eq. (1) was adopted, since it corresponds to an inverse of measurement precision of the coin- cident neutron signal (doubles). Hence it provides a convenient measure of the desired system performance.
The selected 3He-based reference system, HLNCC-II, is shown  in Fig. 3 (left). It consists of a single ring of 18 cylindrical 3He proportional detectors  with  1″ (2.5 cm)  diameter.  The  detectors  are  ﬁlled  at  4 atm
pressure   and  embedded   in  a  cylindrical   HDPE  body  for   neutron
moderation. The external dimension of the counter corresponds to 13.4″ (34.0 cm) at height of 29.2″ (74.2 cm) (including the junction box with signal processing electronics). The sample cavity dimensions correspond to 6.7″ (17.0 cm) diameter and 16.0″ (41.0 cm) height to accommodate range of sample sizes. The thermal neutron detection
efﬁciency of this system corresponds to 17.5% for a bare 252Cf neutron source located in the center of the sample cavity. The  neutron  die- away  time  of  the  system   corresponds  to  43 μs,  thus  the  FOM  cor-
responds to 2.67.
Based on the above speciﬁcations, the design criteria of the boron-based neutron coincidence counter, HLNB, were deﬁned with the following key requirements:
identical size sample cavity as the HLNCC-II; comparable total height to allow good user access;
counting rate capability as good as, or better than, the HLNCC- II; and
●FOM close to that of the HLNCC-II
To satisfy the design requirements, the HLNB counter is composed of six 24.0″ (61.0 cm) long PDT detector modules that tightly surround
the sample cavity of 6.7″ (17.0 cm) diameter. In order to achieve this compact geometry, two of the six detector modules have narrower footprint of 7.0″ ~ 5.0″ (17.8 ~ 12.7 cm), while the other four detector modules have footprint of 8.0″ ~ 5.0″ (20.3 ~ 12.7 cm). Top view of
the detector arrangement inside the HLNB is shown in Fig. 2 (left).
The height of the HLNB sample cavity corresponds  to  16.1″ (41.0 cm). The sample cavity is deﬁned by a thin aluminum plate attached to the bottom support plate. The top and bottom of the
counter is covered by end-plugs to minimize neutron leakage from the system and maximize the detection efﬁciency. The end-plugs consist of an aluminum core surrounded by high density poly- ethylene. The top end-plug is removable for sample insertion. The bottom  end-plug  can  also  be  removed  and  the  bottom  support
plate has a 5.0″ (12.7 cm) diameter opening to allow for measure- ments of large samples that extend beyond the 16.1″ (41.0 cm) tall sample cavity. To additionally improve the detection  efﬁciency, 0.5″ (1.3 cm) thick HDPE slabs were added along the external sides of   the   counter  to  help   scatter  neutrons  back  into  the   counter
volume. The external HLNB counter shell consists of thin stainless steel sheets that cover the detection part of the detector pods. The stainless steel sheets are attached to four corner posts that provide structural support. The counter is equipped with swivel casters  and hand rails for transportability. A schematic drawing with the overall external dimensions is shown in Fig. 2 (right).
To provide a direct replacement for 3He-based safeguards coun- ter, the boron-based counter must be compatible with the existing data acquisition infrastructure. Multiplicity shift register [17] is currently the most extensively used data acquisition technique  by the IAEA inspectorate. Therefore, a primary function of the HLNB is to provide a single logical output (TTL) compatible with the multi- plicity shift register electronics. In addition, the counter is equipped with a list mode data acquisition capability enabling thus event-by- event recording. This feature was implemented in order to allow for state-of-health monitoring and enable more advanced and ﬂexible data analysis. The list mode data collection also adds to the tamper resistance of the system. List mode data acquisition is performed using Pulse Train Recorder (PTR-32) [18] that records time differ- ences between two subsequent neutron detection events with 10 ns resolution.
The signal processing electronics is housed in the junction box on top of each PDT detector module (Fig. 2, left) and composes of
three ampliﬁer modules per detector pod. Each ampliﬁer module thus processes signals from a pair of boron-lined detection cells. The system has 18 ampliﬁers in total. The counter is equipped with an LED display for a direct state-of-health monitoring. Low voltage and high voltage signals are provided through standard BNC/SHV type connectors on the side of the HLNB top cover. The ﬁnished HLNB counter along with HLNCC-II is shown in Fig. 3.
Overall the HLNB counter remains compact with similar  height as HLNCC for convenient sample insertion. The footprint of HLNB is slightly larger than HLNCC due to the default depth of the individual
PDT detector modules that corresponds to 5.0″ (12.7 cm). The HLNB
is  mounted  on  heavy-duty   swivel  casters  for  transportability.   Its
weight corresponds  to  60 kg  compared  to  40 kg  of  HLNCC, which still allows for system transportability using two side hand- rails. The individual detector modules are equipped with standard PDT electronics typically used in other safeguards systems, thus the provided signals are directly compatible with the existing electronics infrastructure. From the design point of view, the HLNB represents a direct alternative to HLNCC.
Fig. 3. Photograph of the completed boron-based coincidence counter HLNB (right) next to the standard HLNCC-II (left).
Fig. 2. Top view of the PDT detectors inside the HLNB counter (left). Schematic drawing of the HLNB (right).
3.Initial performance evaluation of HLNB at LANL
Initial performance evaluation of the HLNB counter was per- formed at LANL using available 252Cf neutron and 137Cs gamma-ray sources as well as a range of small plutonium (Pu) samples. The experimental activities included evaluation of optimum high voltage (HV) setting, selection of HLNB operating parameters, determination of safeguards relevant parameters (die-away time, efﬁciency, ﬁgure- of-merit (FOM)) and performance evaluation with available low-mass Pu samples. The experimental results obtained with HLNB were reproduced and compared with parallel measurements in the HLNCC-II. The results of these measurements are summarized below.
3.1.Operating HV setting
To obtain operating HV setting for the newly built HLNB, the gains of the individual ampliﬁer modules had to be matched to provide equivalent  response.  The matching of the  individual  signal
processing  ampliﬁers  was  performed  using a 60 mCi (    2.5e05 n/s)
252Cf source located in the center of the sample cavity. Following the
gain matching procedure the operating HV was evaluated. For this purpose the total count rate dependence on HV setting (HV curve) was measured using neutron as well as gamma-ray sources as  shown in Fig. 4. As outlined in [13], operating HV selection must be performed in the presence of gamma-ray source of appropriate dose rate in order to account for gamma-ray discrimination threshold. Without such measurement, the extracted detection efﬁciency could be signiﬁcantly overestimated.
Previous evaluations using high mass plutonium samples suggest the typical gamma-ray dose rate at the detector face of 500 mR/h [19]. Therefore a set of 137Cs gamma-ray sources corresponding to a combined dose rate of ~450 mR/h at the detector face was used to evaluate the correct operating HV setting. To quantify the impor- tance of gamma-ray contribution, a quantity known as GARRn (Gamma Absolute Rejection Ratio in the presence of neutrons) was utilized as deﬁned in [20]. As described in [13], for a routine system operation in the presence of gamma-ray background, the gamma-  ray contribution to the detected neutron signal should not exceed 0.3% (i.e. GARRnr1.003). Based on this criterion, the operating HV setting was chosen to correspond to 880 V as indicated in Fig. 4.
3.2.Selection of operating parameters
In order to operate the HLNB as a coincidence counter, several additional operating parameters must be determined. In the context of the passive neutron coincidence counting, the recorded neutron detection events are analyzed to extract total neutron count rate (singles, S) as well as pairs of correlated neutrons (doubles, D). The measured rate of doubles can be related to the plutonium content within an item via previously obtained calibration curve using well
Fig. 4. HV curves for 252Cf neutron source (full triangles) and set of 137Cs gamma- ray sources (open triangles) with optimum HV setting highlighted by a dashed line
deﬁned standards [16]. To extract the doubles rate from the stream of neutron detection events (also called pulse train) time-correlation techniques are employed that utilize multiplicities measured within ﬁxed length gates applied on the pulse train [16,17]. The width of the gate is a fundamental property of the coincidence counter design and must be determined prior to routine operation. The optimum gate width is directly related to the concept of die-away time, since the optimum gate width needs to be long enough to capture the majority of the correlated events from nuclear ﬁssion. In addition to gate width, another essential parameter utilized in neutron coin- cidence counting is pre-delay. The pre-delay is a short (1   few  ms)
time interval that corresponds to the minimum time necessary  for
the detection system to return to quiescent conditions following a detection event to remove any dead-time and baseline shift effects. For HLNB operation, the initial value of pre-delay was taken
over from the parameters of HLNCC-II counter and set to 4.5 ms. Further optimization of this value by a dedicated measurement is possible. It can be anticipated that due to faster timing character-
istics of the PDT detector modules [10], the optimum pre-delay should be shorter than 4.5 ms. Thus, the current selection of the pre-delay value will be conservative, however, should not affect
the results presented in the following sections.
The operating gate width for HLNB was evaluated by measuring doubles rates corresponding to several different gate width settings and extracting corresponding relative standard deviation (RSD). The RSD plot as a function of gate width was then constructed to ﬁnd the optimum gate width corresponding to the minimum RSD. Since the RSD plot exhibits a rather shallow minimum, the ﬁnal gate width setting was further constrained using known parameters of HLNCC-
II (die-away time of 43 ms and corresponding gate width of 64 ms). The HLNB operating gate width was selected to correspond to the same fraction of the system die-away time as in case of the HLNCC-II
counter and corresponds to 112 ms.
3.3.Die-away time and detection efﬁciency
Using the HV, pre-delay and gate width settings determined in the previous sections, the die-away and efﬁciency measurements were performed. Both measurements were performed using 252Cf neutron source located on a source rod in the center of the HLNB sample cavity. The results are summarized in Table 1.
From Table 1 it can be seen that current HLNB design exceeds the detection efﬁciency of HLNCC-II by 7%, however, the die-away time of HLNB is about a factor of 1.7 longer than in case of the HLNCC-II. As a consequence, the safeguards FOM of HLNB corresponds to 81% of the HLNCC-II performance. From the summary in Table 1, it can be concluded that the signiﬁcantly longer die-away time of HLNB considerably penalizes its overall performance. Longer die-away time
Table 1
Efﬁciency and die-away time measured for HLNB counter at 880 V operating voltage. Measurements are compared to HLNCC-II.
Table 2
MCNP study of the inﬂuence of boron-layer thickness on the HLNB response.
Table 3
Overview of PuO2 samples measured in HLNB and HLNCC-II (declaration date: 08/16/2008).
Fig. 5. Doubles rates measured for a range of low mass PuO2 samples in HLNB and HLNCC.
in coincidence system adversely  affects  the  measurement  precision  of correlated rates (doubles), since it allows for larger portion of accidental correlated events to be counted within the longer gate window. This effect is typically more pronounced for samples with large neutron output and thus it can be  anticipated  that  slightly longer measurements times will be needed with large samples in HLNB. However, for small plutonium sample measurements, the penalty diminishes as demonstrated in the following section. HLNB performance evaluation with large plutonium samples will be per- formed in a separate ﬁeld test of the unit and will be reported separately.
Parallel Monte Carlo N-Particle Code (MCNP) simulations of the HLNB counter were performed to evaluate the inﬂuence of boron- layer thickness on the system die-away time and efﬁciency. The calculations indicated strong sensitivity of the die-away time to the boron-layer thickness, while the effect on the overall  system  efﬁ- ciency remained fairly moderate. The MCNP results  are summarized in Table 2. The results indicate a possibility to further improve HLNB performance via additional optimization of the boron-layer thickness. Alternative techniques for coating the boron lined plates could provide room for better boron-layer optimization and  improved overall HLNB performance.
3.4. Evaluation with plutonium samples
A range of low mass PuO2 samples available at LANL was measured in the HLNB and HLNCC-II in parallel to compare their performance with realistic samples. Pu samples were positioned in the center of the sample cavity of each counter and measured for 1–2 h. The characteristics of the Pu samples are summarized in Table 3.
The measured doubles rates as a function of 240Pu effective mass  (m240Pu  2.52m238Pu  m240Pu  1.68m242Pu  [16]) for  both counters are shown in Fig. 5. The higher HLNB detection efﬁciency is reﬂected in the higher values of doubles rates compared to HLNCC-II, which is especially pronounced for the largest sample. The measurement precision is comparable for the smallest sam- ples, however, for the largest sample the HLNCC-II precision is
well as compare its physical dimensions to an equivalent 3He- based system. The design parameters of the HLNB were derived from an existing 3He-based HLNCC counter and the ﬁnished system satisﬁed the core requirements aimed to maintain similar dimensions and sample cavity as HLNCC as well as compatibility with the existing electronics infrastructure. The HLNB has slightly larger footprint and weight than HLNCC due to the larger size of individual PDT pods, however, still allows for transportability using swivel casters and a pair of handrails.
Initial performance evaluation of the HLNB coincidence counter using 252Cf neutron sources demonstrated  the  signiﬁcant  potential of the technology. The thermal neutron detection efﬁciency of HLNB was shown to be ~ 7% higher than that of 3He-based HLNCC. This advantage was, however, countered by a factor of 1.7 longer  die- away time in case of HLNB. The FOM of the HLNB thus corresponds to 81% of an equivalent 3He-based system performance. Evaluation using realistic small Pu samples illustrated that the overall perfor- mance of the two systems was essentially the same for the range of samples tested. However, for high rate counting (i.e. large mass samples), the HLNCC precision is expected to be slightly superior due to its shorter die-away time. Overall it is expected that current HLNB design will be capable to perform NDA of the same family of samples as HLNCC, however with slightly longer measurement times for large samples. The initial performance evaluation also revealed areas for potential future improvement with the main focus on optimization and better control  of  boron-layer  deposition. Further optimization of boron-layer thickness is expected to reduce the die-away time of HLNB without signiﬁcantly compromising the neutron detection efﬁciency.
Further ﬁeld evaluation of HLNB side-by-side with HLNCC using broader range of Pu samples including large (hundreds of grams- kilograms) samples not available at LANL is being pursued in order to fully assess the target HLNB design criteria. Field trial will also provide essential input on deployment related questions, including shipment and transportation, as well as performance under non- laboratory conditions (different environmental conditions, potential external sources of noise etc.). Based on the performance character- istics of HLNB presented in this paper (efﬁciency, die-away time, FOM) it can be anticipated that the system will be capable to perform measurements over a full sample range corresponding to its design basis as a replacement to HLNCC (i.e. broad range of Pu bearing materials up to and including several kg samples).
Nevertheless, its longer die-away time will be reﬂected in the measurement precision and longer measurement times (of the order of 1.5 times longer) might be needed.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, National Nuclear Security Administration, through the Ofﬁce of Nuclear Nonproliferation and International Security’s Next Gen- eration Safeguards Initiative (NGSI).
