<title>The influence of experience and knowledge on reactor safety in Germany</title>
<author>Raphael Bointner and Katharina Schubert</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Vienna University of Technology, Institute of Energy Systems and Electric Drives, Energy Economics Group, Gusshausstrasse 25-29/370-3, 1040 Wien/Vienna, Austria; b.Ruhr-Universita¨t Bochum, Chair of Energy Systems and Energy Economics,Universita¨tsstrasse 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2015.1087352</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2015.1087352</URL>
After five decades of nuclear power generation in Germany, the government decided to phase out nuclear power plants until 2022 as a consequence of the Fukushima disaster in 2011. Electricity generation is ac- companied by human and technical errors, which questions if the nuclear phase-out has an influence on reactor safety. Past errors, available as so-called reportable events of nuclear power plants, can be approxi- mated with experience measured in cumulated electricity generation by applying the Duffey–Saull method with a high coefficient of determination (R2 0.84). Errors are declining with growing experience, which means the reportable events per TWh are declining over time. Today, approximately 0.9 reportable events per generated TWh occur and, given unchanging operational conditions, it is expected to remain at this magnitude in the near future. Moreover, knowledge induced by public Research and Development expen- ditures may supplement experience in reducing reportable events. Thus, the cumulative fission knowledge stock of Germany was added to the Duffey–Saull method for the first time. By adjusting the knowledge depreciation rate within this extended method, the prediction of reportable events is more accurate. Best results were obtained with 10.8% depreciation rate, which is also in line with the literature.
Keywords: nuclear energy; nuclear phase-out; Germany; learning by doing; learning by searching; nuclear safety
1.Introduction
The history of Germany’s nuclear energy use goes back to 1957, when the first research reactor in Munich started operation. The first commercially used nuclear reactor with a gross capacity of 16 MW was set into operation in 1962 [1]. Several other reactors followed until 1974. In these early days, predominantly small re- search reactors were in operation. In 1975, the first large- scale nuclear power plant Biblis A with a gross capac- ity of 1.2 GWel was set into operation. After several years of increasing installed nuclear capacity, the max- imum of 23.2 GWel was reached in 1990 with a total number of 21 grid-connected nuclear power plants. No further nuclear power plants were set into operation af- ter 1989 while several older plants have been decommis- sioned since then. Even if there was some research in the field of sodium (Na)-cooled fast breeders and gas-cooled high-temperature reactors, all commercial reactors are light water reactors, namely, pressure or boiling water reactors.
However, after the Fukushima accident in March 2011, Germany decided to phase out nuclear energy by 2022. Seven nuclear power plants were shut down im- mediately in 2011, while nine others will follow a grad- uated phase-out scheme. The shutdowns of the finally remaining pressure water reactors, Isar II, Emsland and Neckarwestheim, latest by 2022 will close the chapter of Germany’s nuclear electricity generation as part of the German Energiewende. Von Hirschhausen [2] provides further reading on the history, targets, and implications of the globally witnessed Energiewende. Moreover, the German Energiewende is setting ambitious targets for decreasing greenhouse gas emissions, increasing energy efficiency and generation of electricity from renewable sources. This ongoing transition of Germany’s electric- ity generation mix is mainly influenced by other deter- minants such as gas prices and energy efficiency gains rather than the nuclear phase-out itself [3]. Thus, the nu- clear phase-out has only a modest influence on electric- ity prices [4]. They also found no evidence of capacity
shortages, which is supported by Schneider and Frog- gatt [5], who report structural overcapacities in Europe. Therefore, the shutdown of the remaining nuclear power plants may come even earlier due to changed corporate strategies [4]. For instance, the German energy utility E.ON shut down the nuclear power plant Grafenrhein- feld on 27 June 2015 [6], six months earlier than regu- lated by law because of economic conditions [7].
Due to the increasing electricity generation from re- newable energy sources [8] in conjunction with the pri- ority dispatch of the renewable electricity, conventional plants have to cope with declining use of capacity and higher downtime today. Especially the remaining nu- clear power plants, which were initially designed for base load operation, are affected [9]. For the remaining plants, it could mean more frequent load changes, part- load operation and standstills. Also problematic is the abrupt shutdown of the old plants because their reac- tor cores were loaded with new nuclear fuel rods in 2010 [10]. These new nuclear fuel rods, only a few hundred hours in operation, contain an extremely high share of fissile material and thus recriticality may occur during handling. This means operators of shutdown as well as operational plants may be confronted with rather new conditions. Nevertheless, time series of the Bundesamt fu¨ r Strahlenschutz [11–14] indicate that the operational characteristics of nuclear power plants have marginally changed in recent years. The nine remaining nuclear power plants generated only 4% less electricity in 2014 than on average between 2000 and 2006. This is also supported by long time series from 1990 to 2014 derived from the IAEA, PRIS [15]. Thus, it can be assumed that base load generation is still the predominant operation mode of Germany’s nuclear power plants with adequate historic data and long-term experience.Exactly this operating experience is an  indicator for the security of nuclear power plants. Duffey and Saull [16,17] found a universal commonality of the contribution of the human element in any homo- technological system: if learning occurs, there are exponential decreasing mistakes or error rates associ- ated with increasing accumulated experience. This kind of learning due to the experience of failure occurrence can be categorized as learning by doing. Learning by doing is supplemented by learning by searching, which may enhance learning by doing. Learning by searching is expressed by the growth of the so-called cumulative knowledge stock. The knowledge acquisition obtained by humans embedded in a homo-technological system reflects learning trends [18]. Thus, Germany’s  cumula-
tive knowledge stock of nuclear power is related to the learning rate mentioned above. The nuclear knowledge stock in Germany reached its top level around 1990 and showed a tremendous decline since then [19]. Further- more, it is supposed that the declining of the nuclear knowledge stock due to declining public Research and Development (R&D) investments in Germany will continue. Future public R&D investments will quite likely focus on energy efficiency and renewable energies due to the above-mentioned German Energiewende.
This raises the research question which influence learning by doing and learning by searching has on rector safety in Germany. Given current nuclear power plant operation, which is mainly base load: How many reportable events can be expected in the last years of nuclear power plant operation in Germany during nu- clear phase-out? To answer the question, ex-post investi- gations on past decades’ learning by doing and learning by searching by applying the learning hypothesis of Duf- fey and Saull [16,17] are conducted. This gives – ceteris paribus – a detailed insight into the development of sys- temic risk under growing experience and serves as a basis for ex-ante estimations of reactor safety in the next years. Thus, this study reveals the reactor safety in Germany and the associated relation between experience (learn- ing by doing) and the cumulated knowledge (learning by searching).
2.Material and methods
2.1.Learning
The learning hypothesis is a physical model for hu- man behaviour when working in conjunction with a technological system. The hypothesis is based on the as- sumption that humans learn from events occurring due    to mistakes. The failure rate of a “homo-technological system” λ, therefore declines with growing experience ε, when learning occurs proportional to the rate of learn-  ing k [16]:
@1
This Duffey–Saull method, a set of rules for analysing error data based on the learning hypothesis [16], has been successfully proved in several fields such as transportation, e.g. aircraft accidents, in the chemi- cal industry and nuclear safety [17]. It is used to deter- mine learning by doing in nuclear power plant opera- tion. Error data for this study are available as so-called reportable events of nuclear reactors in Germany. Along with the theory, the failure rate (or instantaneous rate IR) shows an exponential decay with growing experi- ence measured in cumulated nuclear electricity genera- tion TWhcum, in year t. This simply means mistakes, mea- sured in reportable events per TWh, are declining with growing experience. The instantaneous rate can be ap- proximated over the whole period with the equation
@2
in which a, b and c are constants.
The past nuclear electricity generation of German power plants is derived from VGB PowerTech e.V. [20] and [8]. Future estimates of nuclear electricity gener- ation are based on the remaining, permitted nuclear
Figure 1. Annual and cumulated nuclear electricity genera- tion in Germany from 1961 to 2022.
electricity generation by 1 January 2014 provided by Bundesamt  fu¨ r  Strahlenschutz  [11].  These  sources  are used to calculate the cumulated electricity generation of nuclear power plants in Germany by 2013 and estimateits magnitude until 2022. The produced as well as the cumulated nuclear electricity generation in Germany is shown in Figure 1. The electricity generation is closely linked to the history of nuclear power plants, which is described in Sections 1 and 3.1. It has to be kept in mind that these are historical data, which are linked to the op- erational conditions of these days. This implies mainly base load generation. Thus, the results of this study are directly linked to these operational conditions, and con- clusions on reactor safety under changing operational conditions, e.g. frequent load shifts, shall not be drawn from this study.
Operational failures of nuclear power plant opera- tion are available in form of reportable events by Bunde- samt fu¨ r Strahlenschutz [21]. They have to be reported for each reactor and date back to 1965. In the early years of reactor operation, failure reporting was unsys- tematically and not strictly regulated. Since 1977, the re- ports have been more detailed and containing statisti- cal evaluation. The evolution of reportable events and reportable events per TWh is shown in Figure 2. While
Figure 2. Reportable events (left-hand axis) and reportable events per TWh (right-hand axis) from 1965 to 2013.
the absolute number of reportable events was increas- ing with nuclear electricity generation until the 1980s, re- portable events per TWh are declining with growing ex- perience measured by cumulative electricity generation. A more detailed discussion of this relation is provided in Section 3.
2.2.The cumulative fission knowledge stock
As stated above, learning does not happen only by doing but also by searching. This is captured by the cumulative knowledge stock. Germany’s cumulative knowledge stock (KS) of nuclear power is used for ex- plaining past and future instantaneous rates of nuclear reactors. The cumulative nuclear knowledge stock in Germany comprises the depreciated cumulative knowl- edge stock of the last period (1 – δ) x KS (t – 1) and the R&D expenditures (RD) in the period t – x. Thus, the cumulative nuclear fission knowledge stock (KS) is cal- culated as follows:
@3
Kobos et al. [22] and Klaassen et al. [23] give a com- prehensive overview of this methodology, also including the knowledge depreciation δ and the time lag t – x. Pub- lic nuclear energy R&D expenditures of the federal gov- ernment of Germany were derived from [24] and [25] for the period 1956–2007 and from the Federal Ministry of Education and Research [26] for the period 2009–2013; data for 2008 are interpolated. Time series of nuclear R&D expenditures of the federal states are very frag- mented. To overcome this hurdle, [24] is used to roughly estimate public nuclear energy R&D expenditures of the Federal States of Germany. Finally, the data-set com- prises nuclear fission R&D expenditures and unallo- cated expenditures related to nuclear technology.  Fur- ther, the data are split into expenditures for nuclear en- ergy research, nuclear decommissioning and risk miti- gation. Thus, the data on the German nuclear R&D ex- penditures within the commonly known International Energy Agency (IEA) database1 are used for validation only. Time series on annual inflation rates from Statis- tisches Bundesamt [27] and the economic  outlooks  of the International Monetary Fund [28] and the invest- ment bank Itau´ BBA [29] are used to calculate past and future public nuclear energy R&D expenditures in real 2013 prices.
2.3.Literature review
In contrast to risk analysis based on human mis- takes, decision making and equipment reliability anal- ysis, the human learning curve theory accounts for the dynamic integration of humans and technology under consideration of learning. Thus, with growing experi- ence, humans in a homo-technological system are able
to learn from their mistakes [17]. The failure rate of a homo-technological system declines with growing expe- rience when learning occurs proportional to the rate of learning [16]. This approach, the so-called Duffey–Saull method, developed by Duffey and Saull [17] provides  a theoretical basis for the determination of whether a data-set follows the human learning curve. Moreover, it enables the experience-based prediction of future instan- taneous rates. The Duffey–Saull method is an “emergent theory,” which does not explain human behaviour or psychological contributions in detail [17]. The Duffey– Saull method uses the learning hypothesis to predict er- rors as a function of experience. It is important to no- tice that human learning is imperfect. Thus, errors can- not only occur due to making mistakes but also due to forgetting: necessarily, we have to differentiate between “errors of commission” and “errors of omission” [17].
Although similar, the above-mentioned human learning curve is different from the economic learning curve. The economic learning curve concept is com- monly known as it assumes a cost reduction by increased output. Risks associated with applying the simple eco- nomic learning curve have been shown by Nordhaus [30]. A more complex economic learning curve model applying a Cobb-Douglas function, including produc- tion and knowledge as exogenous input, has been de- veloped by Miketa and Schrattenholzer [31] and applied by scholars [22,23]. In contrary to usual learning rates, Gru¨ bler [32] has shown negative learning rates by using the simple learning curve for pressurised water reactors in France due to the complexity of nuclear technology, which hinders learning by doing. “Organisational for- getting” could be an explanation for negative learning [33]. Although they argue that it is highly speculative, if this is the case for nuclear energy, “organisational forget- ting” supports the above-mentioned concept of “errors of omission.”
Annual R&D expenditures are needed to  calcu- late the nuclear fission knowledge stock. Nuclear en- ergy technology in Germany received public R&D sup- port by the Federal Government and the Federal States of Germany (Bundesla¨nder) since 1956. These nuclear R&D  expenditures  of  the  Bundesla¨nder  were  around 25% of the total nuclear R&D expenditures in the 1970s and 10% in 2007 [24]. Based on this finding and data of the German Bundesla¨nder from 1956 to 1975 in their report, nuclear R&D expenditures of the Bundesla¨nder are roughly estimated since 1976. Thus, the knowledge stock implies several important implications, which are discussed thereinafter.
First, there is a disruption in the time series from 1973 to 1974 due to changing methodology (see [24]). Further, the data-set does not contain nuclear R&D expenditures  of  the  five  new  Bundesla¨nder  (former German Democratic Republic) before 1992, which is the same within the IEA energy R&D database [34]. Second, the data-set does not include private R&D expenditures, which generally play an important role [35]. Wiesen-
thal et al. [36] estimate that 44% of Europe’s 1.25 bil- lion EUR nuclear fission R&D investments in 2007 were financed by private companies, largely concentrated in France. The French Court of Audit [37] calculated the total French R&D expenditures for nuclear electricity generation from 1957 to 2010 at around 55.2 bn EUR, of which 17.1 bn EUR were financed by private companies. For comparison, in the same period, the public R&D ex- penditures for nuclear fission in Germany were 54.5 bn EUR of which 45.2 bn EUR were financed by the Fed- eral Government. However, neither time series nor reli- able private nuclear R&D expenditures are available for Germany. Moreover, German payments to international organisations dealing with nuclear energy research, such as the Euratom programme are not captured, because
(1) their exact amount over this long period is not avail- able and (2) the contribution to the German nuclear fis- sion knowledge stock is uncertain. This means knowl- edge from private and European sources is assumed as external knowledge.
Third, the public energy R&D expenditures do not account for the potential of knowledge spillovers as highlighted by several scholars [36,38,39]. Knowledge spillovers may come from other technologies or from other countries. Globally, 65% of past public R&D ex- penditures for nuclear energy were provided in descend- ing order in Japan, the USA and France [40]. The his- tory, structure and the R&D expenditures of Euratom and other European nuclear fission cross-border pro- grammes, which may result in knowledge spillovers,  are described in [41]. In addition, the nuclear industry is concentrated in a few countries with large, interna- tional cross-border companies. For instance, the Ger- man companies AEG and Siemens formed Kraftwerk Union (KWU) to bundle their nuclear activities in 1969.
In the 1990s, Siemens-KWU cooperated with E´ lectricite´
de France (EdF) and the French company Framatome to develop new reactor types as stated by WNA [42]. Later in 2001 Siemens-KWU and Framatome merged. This development may serve as an example of cross- border cooperation in the nuclear energy technology sec- tor.  Under consideration of all those developments, it is very likely to have knowledge spillovers in the nu- clear industry. However, they are not captured by pub- lic energy R&D expenditures. An opportunity to esti- mate knowledge spillovers would be using bibliometrics as suggested by [43] or measuring the knowledge via patents as applied by [44] and [38]. On the other hand, patent data also have several limitations, which are not a subject of this paper; Bointner [19] provides further reading on this issue.
Finally, knowledge, whether known or tacit, is linked to the skills of the workforce. This means that knowledge is getting lost e. g. due to retirements and resignations. In general, this circumstance is covered by the depreci- ation of knowledge. Due to the shortage of skilled pro- fessionals in nuclear energy technology and an overaged workforce in Germany [45], the branch is in danger of a
tremendous loss of knowledge in the future. This might have an impact on nuclear safety and questions, if a dy- namic depreciation rate prevails over static depreciation as applied in this study (cf. Section 4). Although these dynamics exist, the structure and the fluctuation rate of the workforce are not captured in this study. Thus, it should be taken into account in future investigations on nuclear knowledge and reactor safety.
3.Results
3.1.Reportable events: learning by doing
The absolute number of reportable events in nuclear power plants over the last 50 years (1965–2014) in Ger- many varied between 2 errors in 1965 and 334 in 1986. Reportable events before 1991 refer to West Germany. Most of these reportable events were below-scale and a few anomalies according to the International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale2 (INES0 and INES 1). A very little number was classified as incident (INES 2). No reportable events were classified INES 3 or higher.3 More interesting than the absolute number of reportable events is to plot these errors against the produced cu- mulative electricity, which is the measure for experience. These errors per TWh nuclear electricity generation in German nuclear power plants between 1965 and 2013 are as shown in Figure 3. It is important to note that ex- perience, not time, is relevant for the x-axis. As expected, the number of reportable events per TWh is declining with growing experience, which indicates learning bene- fits with growing experience. However, sometimes learn- ing seems to be insufficient.
Five phases of different rates of learning are deter- mined in Figure 3. According to [16], learning is signif- icant for three separated phases (negative gradient) but insufficient in between (positive gradient). This develop- ment is closely linked to starting operation of nuclear power plants, as shown in Figure 4. Putting the first small scale commercial reactors into operation offered good opportunities to learn from errors. This first phase lasted from 1962 to the mid-1970s. Insufficient learning since
Figure 3. Reportable events in German nuclear power plants per cumulated experience from 1965 to 2013.
Figure 4. Gross capacity of nuclear power plants in Ger- many; own illustration based on [42] and [46].
mid-1970s seems to result from a large increase of capac- ity within a few years. Five light water reactor units with a cumulated capacity of more than 5500 MW started commercial power operation between 1972 and 1975. Moreover, the first German fast breeder reactor was set into operation at the nuclear research centre Karlsruhe in 1974 (Phase 2). Phase 3 from the end of the 1970s  to the mid-1980s saw an error reduction with a slowed instalment of new capacity between 1977 and 1984 as shown in Figure 4. Besides, the large increase of the nu- clear fission knowledge stock as shown in Section 3.2 since the late 1970s ensured these error reductions. Phase 4, a slight error increase in the second half of the 1980s, was due to more than 14,300 MW newly installed capac- ity from 1984 to 1989. This was the largest jump in Ger- many’s installed nuclear capacity as shown in Figure 4 and most of these plants are still in operation today. The start of construction of these 1980s power plants was closely linked to the oil crises of the 1970s. As a con- sequence, West Germany supported the development of nuclear power notably in the 1970s [42]. However, pub- lic opinion of nuclear power gradually changed against, which led to no new constructions after the Chernobyl accident in 1986. This last development of nuclear power plants in West Germany led to Phase 5; a period with growing experience but without new instalments. Thus, the instantaneous rate was continuously declining and reached its bottom line of less than one reportable event per TWh as shown in Figure 3.
As stated in Section 2.1, reportable events before 1977 were not collected systematically by [21]. More- over, these early days of commercial reactor use  in West Germany were characterised by testing rather than generating electricity at large scale. Thus, we focus on the development of reportable events since 1977  and thereinafter. Figure 5 shows the development of reportable events in German nuclear power plants since then, which can be approximated with the Duffey–Saull method. This approximation is given by the red line in Figure 5, also indicating the 95% confidence interval with the dashed line. There are only two outliers, which are slightly below the lower limit. Moreover, based on the remaining nuclear electricity generation [11], which Figure 5. Instantaneous rate of reportable events in German nuclear power plants per cumulated experience since 1977; R2 = 0.835.
is given by law, future reportable events per TWh can be estimated. Therefore, the number of active nuclear power plants per year and their annually generated electricity is calculated based on [11], rather than on the latest shutdown date given by law. Approximately 0.86 (  0.26) reportable events per TWh may  be expected,  as shown in Table 1. According to theory, this is a consequence of gained experience via learning by doing. As the annual electricity generation from nuclear power plants is declining, it is expected that the absolute number of reportable events declines – ceteris paribus – as well. Given the past reportable events and the future estimates, it can be assumed that the last years of nuclear power generation in Germany under current conditions, which means mainly base load operation, will be with- out any serious incidents, as shown by the estimated reportable events in Table 1. However, it has to be kept in mind that the minimum and maximum reportable events shown therein are the lower and the upper 95% confidence limits, respectively. This means that by a probability of 0.95, the real reportable events in a given year are within the range of the lower and the upper lim- its. While real reportable events below the lower limit are highly appreciated in reactor safety, there is a remaining probability of 0.025 that the reportable events of a given
Figure 6. Cumulative nuclear fission Knowledge Stock of Germany induced by R&D expenditures of the Federal Gov- ernment and the Federal States (mil. EUR in 2013 prices; knowledge depreciation 10%, time lag 3 yrs).
year are above the upper 95% confidence limit. More- over,  it is important to keep in mind that the number  of reportable events is no measure for severity of events. For instance, the number of reportable events in year  A could be above the upper confidence limit, each of minor influence on reactor safety. In year B, the number of reportable events may be around the lower 95% con- fidence limit, while one of these events could be severe.
3.2.Cumulative nuclear knowledge stock: learning by searching
The German government has long considered nu- clear fission as an important part of the nation’s en- ergy supply to provide energy security at low environ- mental impact [47]. After a strong initial grow of the cumulative nuclear knowledge in the 1960s and 1970s, especially following the oil price shock of 1973, the cu- mulative nuclear fission knowledge peaked in 1987 with
15.5 bn EUR as shown in Figure 6. After the Cher- nobyl disaster in 1986, the public perception of nuclear power has changed and the nuclear knowledge induced by R&D expenditures faced a tremendous annual de- cline until 2007. The most immediate policy effect of Chernobyl was the termination of R&D expenditures for high-temperature as well as fast breeder reactors [42].
Table 1. Estimated nuclear electricity generation and reportable events until 2022 based on the remaining nuclear electricity generation.6 This change of public R&D policy created high sunk costs, because a notable amount of public nuclear en- ergy R&D expenditures in the 1960s and 1970s was di- rected towards high-temperature and fast breeder reac- tors, which were almost not used for electricity genera- tion in Germany [24]. After two turnarounds in German nuclear policy in 1998 and 2010, the government decided to phase out nuclear power after the Fukushima acci- dent in 2011 [2]. Today’s cumulative nuclear knowledge of Germany after all these changes is 5.2 bn EUR. The nuclear fission R&D in Germany now focuses primarily on reactor safety and fail-safe-components. Moreover, facing the phase-out of nuclear energy, nuclear waste dis- posal and decommissioning of nuclear power plants be- came an important topic in recent years, while nuclear fission knowledge is still declining. However, the decline is at lower rates than before 2007. The development of the knowledge induced by the Bundesla¨nder was simi- lar to the Federal Government’s knowledge stock. It was notable from the mid-1970s until mid-1990s and contin- uously declined since then to 0.4 bn EUR in 2014.
Moreover, two scenarios for the future development of nuclear energy R&D expenditures in Germany until 2022 were calculated, namely a high and a low scenario. It is not likely that the German public R&D expendi- tures for nuclear fission after the phase-out decision will increase but they will rather decline. Although the de- cline rate remains uncertain, it is assumed to be below 10% p.a. Thus, the rationale of the low and the high scenario is to set the most likely lower and upper lim- its of the R&D expenditures for nuclear fission. There- fore, both scenarios are based on moving averages of the R&D expenditures in the last five years, whereas the low scenario assumes in addition a 10% annual decline of the nuclear fission R&D expenditures and a 5% annual de- cline of R&D expenditures for decommissioning due to Germany’s phase-out.4 The high scenario (or business as usual scenario) is simply based in the moving aver- age as mentioned above and assumes no additional in- crease or decrease. According to the results of both sce- narios, it is expected that the cumulated nuclear knowl- edge stock in Germany will slightly decline to 4.7–4.9 bn EUR in 2022. Due to this very small difference, Figure 6 shows the high scenario only. It is important to note that Figure 6 shows the cumulative nuclear fission knowl- edge stock of Germany under 10% p.a. depreciation rate. While the knowledge stock is almost unaffected by the assumed time lag between R&D expenditures and the gain of knowledge, it is highly sensitive against depre- ciation. However, the assumed 10% in Figure 6 is in line with the literature; see [48]. The total nuclear energy R&D expenditures in Germany between 1956 and 2013 sum up to 56 bn EUR, which is equivalent to the knowl- edge under no depreciation. On the other hand, given a 20% depreciation rate, the cumulated knowledge stock in 2014 would be only 2.3 bn EUR. For this reason, the several different depreciation rates were applied in the forthcoming sections.
Figure 7. Cumulative nuclear fission knowledge stock in- duced by public R&D expenditures per reportable events (mil. EUR in 2013 prices; knowledge depreciation 10%, time lag 3 yrs) and reportable events per TWh.
Moreover, knowledge for decommissioning and waste disposal has no direct influence on the opera-  tion of nuclear power plants. Therefore, this knowledge is not considered as relevant for reactor safety; it is presented as additional information on the overall pic- ture of the nuclear knowledge in Germany. The cumula- tive knowledge without decommissioning and waste dis- posal peaked in 1987 with 14.5 bn EUR at 10% depreci- ation rate. The fission related knowledge induced by the Federal Government and the Bundesla¨nder was 3.4 bn EUR in 2014 and it is expected to decline to 2.9–3.1 bn EUR in 2022.
The decline of knowledge also led to a remarkable decline of knowledge per reportable event since 2000 as shown in Figure 7. The fission knowledge per reportable event is indicating the reliability of controlling incidents and thus avoiding severe accidents. Moreover, Figure 7 shows the number of reportable events per TWh on the right hand y-axis. There is a negative correlation be- tween the cumulative nuclear fission knowledge stock per reportable events and the instantaneous rate (re- portable events per TWh). This means that the larger the knowledge, the smaller is the instantaneous rate. Three such phases were identified in Figure 7.
There was a first steep decline in knowledge per event between 1977 and 1980, a period in which the installed capacity almost doubled to 8.3 GW. On the contrary, the beginning of commercial operation of Grafenrhein- feld, Kru¨ mmel and Grundremmingen B nuclear power plants, adding 4.1 GW of installed capacity between 1982 and 1984, had no observed influence on the knowl- edge per reportable event. After 1985, the knowledge per event saw a tremendous decline, which is related to a jump in German nuclear capacity as stated above. The correlation between the cumulative fission knowledge stock per reportable events and the instantaneous rate in this first phase lasting from 1977 to 1987 was – 0.32. It was an unsteady period, marked with increasing knowl- edge and increasing nuclear capacities, which shows tur- bulence rather than a trend.
In Phase 2 from 1988 to 2002 the correlation was
– 0.51. After 1989, no further nuclear capacities were added and experience outweighed decreasing knowl- edge. In the 1990s, both knowledge and reportable events were declining, however the reportable events were declining at higher rates, for which reason the knowledge per event was increasing again. However, the continuous knowledge decline led to a second tremen- dous decline of knowledge per reportable event in the beginning of the new millennium. This was also related to extraordinary high reportable events in 2002.
Since then, the knowledge per reportable event re- mained rather stable and a steady state was reached. This marks Phase 3 lasting from 2003 to 2013, in which knowledge per reportable events and the instantaneous rate are highly negatively correlated with – 0.71. As shown in Figure 7, the above-mentioned depreciation rate alters the available knowledge per reportable event but not the shape of the time series. This is presented for three different depreciation rates; the rationale of the 10.8% depreciation rate is described in the next section.Finally, it has to be mentioned that the knowledge perreportable event is strongly increasing in the next years. This is the consequence of the gradual phase-out of nu-clear power plants going along with a decreasing number of reportable events as shown in Table 1. It is the case for the high as well as the low knowledge stock scenario.
3.3. Synthesis of learning by doing and learning by searching
Relations between learning by doing and learning by searching are long and controversially discussed in the scientific literature. For instance, a broad number of scholars were – and still are – discussing the pros and cons of the two-factor-learning-curve model introduced by Miketa and Schrattenholzer [31]. After several tests of reportable events per TWh and the cumulative fis- sion knowledge stock induced by public R&D expen-ditures within the Duffey–Saull method, we assume a relation between knowledge, reportable events and ex- perience. This is shown in Figure 8, whereat the correla-Figure 8. Reportable events and cumulative nuclear fission knowledge stock per TWh (mil. EUR in 2013 prices; knowl- edge depreciation 10%, time lag 3 yrs).tion between reportable events per TWh and knowledge per TWh is 0.95. Figure 8 indicates that knowledge is “translated” into experience, which reduces the number of reportable events. This relation is subsequently inves- tigated by developing an extended model of the Duffey– Saull method with a surprisingly high quality in estimat- ing the instantaneous rate.
As a first step, in order to estimate the influence of learning by searching on the instantaneous rate, the constant c given in formula (2) is divided by the cumu- lative knowledge per year under different depreciation rates δ.
@4
This step introduces the auxiliary variable ct∗, which
can be approximated with an exponential function grow- ing over time. The constant parameters d, e and f of the exponential function lead to time-dependent variable ct, which is defined as follows:
@5
KS(t,δ) in formula (5) denotes the cumulated knowledge stock derived from formula (3) in year t. Very high co- efficients of determination (R2 > 0.98) were derived for estimating ct∗ with the exponential function for ct us- ing depreciation rates lower than 15% for the knowl- edge stock. For knowledge of 20% depreciation, R2 is still larger than 0.90. By applying formula (5) in formula (2), which means substituting the constant c by the vari- able ct, we finally obtain Equation (6):
@6
Formula (6) relates the instantaneous rate to learn-
ing by doing and learning by searching. The question is, if this advanced calculation of the instantaneous rate fits better for predicting reportable events per TWh than formula (2). This is tested by applying the cumulative fis- sion knowledge stock presented in Section 3.2 with dif- ferent depreciation rates in formula (6). The quality of these estimated functions, also called their behavioural properties, is based on four criteria, namely, consistency, asymptotic normality, efficiency and robustness. This implies that an estimated function is better than another function, if (1) the means of the samples are statistically equal, (2) the estimated function is asymptotically nor- mal, and (3) its variance and (4) its mean squared error are smaller. Behavioural properties of the expectation according to the Duffey–Saull method and the extended model with different depreciation rates are shown in Figure 9 and Table 2. If the extended model fulfils the behavioural properties, it is better than the expectation.
Figure 9. Instantaneous rate of reportable events in German nuclear power plants per cumulative experience and knowl- edge since 1977.
As the data are not normally distributed, a Mann– Whitney rank sum test was conducted to test for significant difference of the medians of the expectation of the instantaneous rate derived by formula (2) against the instantaneous rate derived by applying different knowledge depreciation rates in formula (6). The null hy- pothesis at 5% significance level was accepted in all cases, which means they are statistically equal. Whereas the re- sults for the variance of the data-sets are ambivalent, the mean square error and the coefficient of determination show clearly that very low and high depreciation rates lead to worse results than without considering the cumu- lative fission knowledge. After several iterations, the best result was obtained at 10.83% depreciation rate, whereat the difference between the low and the high knowledge scenario is rather small. Overall, the results obtained by applying cumulative knowledge with a 10.83% depreciation rate are slightly better than the expectation calculated according to formula (2) without including the cumulative fission knowledge stock. This means that by adjusting the depreciation rate, the cumulative knowl- edge stock may add some accuracy for the prediction of the instantaneous rate. Nevertheless, the absolute num- ber of future reportable events as shown in Table 1 before does not change by taking the knowledge stock into  consideration. This is because a very small difference of the instantaneous rate calculated with both models.
Optimising the depreciation rate of knowledge in this model raises the question, if such results could be obtained randomly. In order to test this issue, virtual knowledge stocks at 10% depreciation rate were cre- ated by random-based annual R&D expenditures. As shown in Table 2, the median of the random sample does not differ from the expectation but all other parameters are worse than the initial expectation of the instanta- neous rate. As the cumulative knowledge stock with real data lead to better results than any randomly generated knowledge stock, it can be assumed that the extended model of the Duffey–Saull method including the cumu- lative knowledge stock is credible.
4.Discussion
The Duffey–Saull method is very appropriate in measuring reportable events of nuclear reactors. The ex- pectation of the instantaneous rate follows the real data quite well and robust estimations of future reportable events were calculated. Moreover, the combination of the cumulative knowledge stock and the Duffey–Saull method seems to be a proper extension of the initial model for estimating the instantaneous rate. This com- pletely new approach has been applied for the first time in this study. With growing depreciation, the calculated instantaneous rate fits better to the real data and is best at 10.83% depreciation rate. Depreciation at this range is in line with the literature; see, for instance, the literature review on innovation in the energy sector [48]. Beyond 10.83%, the quality of the calculated instantaneous rate is declining again. Given the improved calculation of the instantaneous rate by adding knowledge under depre- ciation, our study supports the hypothesis of “errors of omission” [17] and “organisational forgetting” [33].
In addition, several time lags were observed. First, there is an obvious time lag between changing macro- economic conditions/disruptions and political response. In a period of state-owned energy utilities and cen- tralised planning, the construction of new power plants can be directly linked to such macro-economic influence. This was the case in the 1970s. Thus, we assume that the beginning of construction of the fast breeder reactor
Table 2. Comparison of the expectation according to formula (2) and estimates according to formula (6) under different knowledge depreciation rates (bold = best value; italic value = worse than expectation), α = 5%.	Karlsruhe and the nuclear power plant Kru¨ mmel in 1974 was already planned before 1973. Given this assump- tion, it took 2.9 years average to respond to the first oil crisis in 1973 with the construction start of seven nuclear power plants with an additional capacity of 9.2 GW. Af- ter the second oil crisis in 1979, it took exactly three years to start the construction of 4 GW capacity in three nuclear power plants. The same three-year time lag is true for nuclear fission R&D expenditures. Compared to 1979 levels, they were slightly declining in 1980 and 1981 but increased by 45% from 1981 to 1982. This was the largest increase from one year to another since the early days of nuclear research in 1961. Due to the structural break of the R&D time series as reported in Section 2.3, such effect is not observed for the first oil crisis. On the other hand, in 1986 and 1987, the nuclear R&D expen- ditures were declining by – 30%, which was the largest annual decrease of the whole time series. This reduction is also reported by WEC [49] and means that the Cher- nobyl disaster led to an immediate political response.
Second, there is a time lag between R&D expendi- tures and the creation of knowledge. This time lag is cap- tured within the model as shown in formula (3). After a literature review, which is also supported by an average duration of EU funded R&D projects of 3.2 years [50], this time lag was subsequently fixed to three years. In addition, a sensitivity analysis of this time lag shows a marginal influence on the results [19]. Several scholars [22,23] provide more information on this time lag.
Third, a time lag of uncertain length for transform- ing the knowledge into experience suggests itself. This potential time lag rose in the description of Figure 7   in Section 3.2, but its magnitude remains untapped. Figure 7 indicates that learning by doing and learning by searching are both not constant but changing over time. For instance, knowledge may depreciate faster in peri- ods of high staff turnover or breakthroughs in research. However, the third time lag and mutable knowledge de- preciation rates are highly speculative. Moreover, adding private R&D expenditures and knowledge spillovers in the cumulative fission knowledge stock within the ex- tended Duffey–Saull method could be a direction of fu- ture research. The application of different depreciation rates outweighs the scarcity of private R&D expendi- tures because high depreciation rates as shown in this study make knowledge obsolete within a few years.
Finally, the calculated instantaneous rate indicates no future change of reportable events per TWh, which means that the phase-out of German nuclear power plants will, ceteris paribus, not affect reactor safety neg- atively. On the other hand, rapid changes in the cir- cumstances of nuclear power generation in Germany could have negative impacts on learning opportunities and thus may increase the instantaneous rate. Particu- larly, the Energiewende may require occasional part load generation, load cycling operations and standstills of the remaining nuclear power plants. Initially, nuclear power plants were designed for base load operation, and there-
fore little experience exists on these new operation char- acteristics. Before the Energiewende between 2005 and 2010, on average 0.73 reportable events per TWh were reported. Since 2011, the average of reportable events per TWh is 0.9, which indicates a slightly higher risk for more reportable events as a consequence of changing operational conditions. Clearly, three observations since 2011 are far too less to make solid statements. There- fore, the potential effect of changing operational con- ditions on reactor safety could be another direction of future research, including the effect of part load gener- ation and more frequent load shifts with corresponding failure data.
This new method has been shown for business as usual base load operation in Germany. For applying the method in other countries such as the France,  Korea   or the United States, adequate time series of reportable events and R&D expenditures for nuclear fission would be required.5 Finally, the extended Duffey–Saull method with real data led to better results than any randomly generated knowledge stock, which proves the credibility of the model.
5.Conclusion
The average nuclear share of Germany’s gross elec- tricity generation was 28.5% between 1990 and 2006 [8]. Since then, it declined to an average of 22.5%, and af- ter the Fukushima disaster in 2011, the German gov- ernment decided to phase-out nuclear power plants by 2022. Today, the nuclear share of Germany’s gross elec- tricity generation is only 15.4%. The ongoing transition of the German electricity generation mix as one pillar of the Energiewende brings several challenges for all electricity producers. In particular, nuclear power plants may face new circumstances such as part load opera- tion and standstills, which could be a direction of future research.
By applying the Duffey–Saull method to estimate the number of reportable events, the calculation follows the real data with a coefficient of determination of 0.84 quite well. Today, approximately 0.86 ( 0.26) reportable events per generated TWh occur and it is expected to re- main at this magnitude in the near future. Thus, based on the results of the extended Duffey–Saull method’s learn- ing hypothesis, it can be assumed that reactor safety will not be affected negatively during the nuclear phase-out. This assumes a status quo, mainly base load operation of nuclear power plants. Given the operational condi- tions between 2011 and 2014, base load operation will be the dominant operation mode of the remaining nu- clear power plants in Germany in the future.
Moreover, the cumulative fission knowledge stock of Germany was calculated, including two future scenar- ios. Today’s cumulative nuclear knowledge in Germany is 5.2 bn EUR, and according to the scenarios, it is expected to decline slightly to 4.7–4.9 bn EUR in 2022. This knowledge stock contains nuclear fission as well as decommissioning and nuclear waste disposal. Knowl- edge induced by public R&D expenditures may supple- ment experience in reducing reportable events. Thus, the cumulative fission knowledge was added as extension to the Duffey–Saull method. By adjusting the knowledge depreciation rate within this extended method, the pre- diction of reportable events is more accurate than the ex- pectation derived from the initial model. Best results are obtained with 10.83% knowledge depreciation rate with a coefficient of determination of 0.86. This extended version of the Duffey–Saull method including the cu- mulative knowledge has been applied for the first time within this study. Further research with additional data, for other countries or applying this extended method to other technologies is of high interest for future studies.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to Romney Duffey (inter alia member of New York Academy of Sciences and former chair of American Nuclear Society) for his helpful feedback on applying his learning hypothesis, Professor Reinhard Haas (Vienna University of Technology) for his feedback on a draft version and two anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.