<title>Mechanism of dissolution of nuclear fuel in nitric acid relevant to nuclear fuel reprocessing</title>
<Affiliation>1.Reprocessing Research & Development Division, Reprocessing Group, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 603102, Tamilnadu, India
2.Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 600036, India
3.Raja Ramanna Fellow, Department of Atomic Energy, Mumbai, India
4.Homi Bhabha National Institute, Anushaktinagar, Mumbai 400094, India
5.Department of Chemical Engineering, Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 400019, India</Affiliation>
<author>N. Desigan • Nirav P. Bhatt • N. K. Pandey • U. Kamachi Mudali •R. Natarajan • J. B. Joshi</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-017-5208-z</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1007/s10967-017-5208-z</URL>
Abstract The mechanism of dissolution of sintered UO2 fuel pellets in nitric acid is the essential starting input information required for the design of a continuous disso- lution system for spent nuclear fuel reprocessing. The current article establishes the mechanism of this reaction under typical PUREX process conditions based on the concentration profiles of nitric & nitrous acids and NOX gas composition during the course of dissolution of sintered UO2 pellets in nitric acid. The results would be useful in optimizing the dissolution process and improving the throughput of the dissolution system.
Keywords UO2 dissolution mechanism · Nitrous acid concentration profile · NOX gas composition · Effect of nitrous acid
Introduction
The Indian Nuclear Power Program (INPP) is designed in three stages to judiciously use the limited uranium reserve and the world’s largest thorium reserve of the country in meeting its long-term energy requirement [1]. The Fast Breeder Reactor (FBR) technology and its associated nuclear fuel cycle activities form the second stage of INPP and is the most important part of INPP in its way forward. Spent nuclear fuel reprocessing is one of the major process steps of the FBR fuel cycle activity which determines the success of the technology in India. Among all the opera- tions in a spent fuel reprocessing plant, dissolution is one of the key process steps that have a strong bearing on the plant throughput as its kinetics is relatively slow. It is also the important process step wherein the spent fuel is brought into a suitable chemical and physical form amenable for its further processing for the recovery of fissile materials during reprocessing. The kinetics of dissolution reaction of the fuel under consideration is the most important and foremost initial input data required for the design. Hence it is desirable to evaluate the kinetics of dissolution of a typical FBR fuel under PUREX process conditions. As UO2 is the major component of a typical FBR fuel (20–30 wt% PuO2 and the rest UO2), it was felt prudent to sys- tematically evaluate the dissolution kinetics of UO2 fuel under typical PUREX process conditions first and the gradually fine tune the experimental methodology for determining the dissolution kinetics of Pu rich MOX fuel in nitric acid. This article explains how the mechanism of dissolution of sintered UO2 fuel pellets under typical PUREX conditions has been unraveled from the knowledge of the concentration profiles of nitric & nitrous acids and NOX gases which are determined during the course of its dissolution in nitric acid.
Accounts of earlier work
The dissolution kinetics of both irradiated and unirradiated nuclear fuel materials in various minerals acids have been a subject of research world over for more than four decades now. As the current article focusses on the dissolution of nuclear fuel under typical PUREX process conditions, we will restrict ourselves only to the work done on the dis- solution of UO2 in nitric acid medium [2–9].
The work of Taylor et al. was one of the earliest studies on the dissolution behavior of UO2 in nitric acid [10]. They studied the effect of concentration of nitric acid solvent and temperature on the dissolution kinetics of UO2 pellets and found them to be proportional to the dissolution rate below the boiling point of the solvent. They also measured the effective surface area of the pellet during dissolution to evaluate the correlation between surface area and dissolu- tion kinetics. Their study revealed for the first time that UO2 dissolves in nitric acid faster under unstirred condi- tions than when stirred for which they could attribute no proper reason.
Subsequently Shabbir and Robins studied the dissolution kinetics of UO2 powder and spheres in nitric acid which had various levels of uranyl nitrate prior to the beginning of the dissolution runs [11, 12]. They found that presence of uranyl ion in nitric acid enhances the dissolution rates of UO2 powders and spheres. Though the work is not directly applicable to reprocessing operations, they proposed the first mechanism for UO2 dissolution in nitric acid with surface oxidation of uranium to uranous ions followed by the liquid phase oxidation of uranous to uranyl by nitrous acid which is produced in situ by the disproportionation of NO2 gas. They also studied the effect of various parameters like acidity, temperature and the extent of agitation. They demonstrated the accelerating effect of nitrous acid on the dissolution rates of UO2 fuel in nitric acid.
The work of Inoue and Tsujino [13], later, further sub- stantiated the negative effect of mixing on the dissolution kinetics of UO2 in nitric acid based on shrinking core model for spherical solids which they employed for ana- lyzing the dissolution rate curves [14]. Inoue further pro- posed an oxidative dissolution mechanism for UO2 in nitric acid based on his measurements of hydrogen ion activities during dissolution [15].
Fukasawa and Ozawa tried to derive a mathematical model for the dissolution of UO2 pellets in nitric acid and its porosity which could explain the dissolution process satisfactorily [16]. They measured the effective surface area of the pellets during the course of dissolution. They further went on to investigate the role of nitrous acid during UO2 pellet dissolution [17]. They predicted the generation and decomposition rate of nitrous acid based on the
solution surface area and temperature and found it to be independent of nitric acid concentration. They concluded that nitrous acid is directly generated at a molarity equal to the dissolved uranium and had no effect on the dissolution rate.
Subsequently Takashima et al. proposed a new head-end process in which spent fuels are decladed by using a rolling straightener and the resulting pulverized fuels are dissolved continuously [18]. In order to develop this proposed head- end process further, Nishimura and et al. studied the dis- solution of UO2 pellets in nitric acid based on the con- centration of the nitrous acid generated during the process [19]. The UO2 powders were found to dissolve more rapidly in HNO3 solution even at temperatures below the boiling point, because the concentrations of HNO2 gener- ated with dissolution becomes lowest in the boiling HNO3 solution.
Prompted by their earlier work, Ikeda et al. went on to further emphasize the role to nitrous acid and proposed a dissolution rate equation for UO2 powders in nitric acid considering the nitrous acid concentration in the solution during the reaction [20]. They could account for the reduction in the dissolution rate on stirring the reaction mixture based on nitrous acid role. This observation was also found in our own work wherein the role of nitrous acid was confirmed by carrying the dissolution run in the presence and absence of hydrazine nitrate, a masking agent for nitrous acid [21].
Furthermore, Ikeda et al. reported the accelerating effect of the presence of noble metal on the dissolution rate of UO2 powders in nitric acid [22]. Though this result trans- lates into the fact that actual spent fuel pellets should dissolve faster due to the presence of noble metal fission products, the reason for this effect wasn’t known yet at that time.
Later Homma and et al. [23] postulated a mechanism for the dissolution of UO2 catalyzed by uranyl ions based on surface penetration theory. Through their penetration model they estimated the penetration and reaction rate constants and evaluated them against the experimental data which was found to be satisfactorily explaining the reaction.
Around the same time, Ikeda et al. ruled out the mechanism via the formation of uranous ions proposed by Shabbir and Robins [11, 12] based on their 17O NMR studies [24]. They proposed the two electron transfer reaction between UO2 and oxidants in the solid phase as the rate determining step.
In addition to the above mentioned literature informa- tions, there are many other works reported in the literature with respect to the dissolution of UO2 fuel materials under various conditions [25–30]. But all these works primarily aimed at understanding the dissolution behavior of spent fuel and waste forms containing UO2 under the deep geological conditions. Hence they don’t bare any direct consequence on the topic of this article which is the dissolution kinetics of UO2 under typical PUREX process conditions.
In spite of all the above mentioned works in the past, the understanding of the dissolution of UO2 pellets in nitric acid under the conditions relevant to the typical PUREX process employed for the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel is not complete still. To understand the kinetics and mechanism of this, the knowledge of nitric and nitrous acid concentration profile  vis-a`-vis  dissolution  process  is  required.  Also  the composition of the NOX gas evolved during the reaction bears a huge impact on the concentration profile of nitrous acid and thereby uranyl ions in the solution.
Therefore it was found necessary to address this by systematically studying the dissolution kinetics of UO2 pellets in nitric acid under typical PUREX process condi- tions and measuring the concentration profiles of nitric & nitrous acids and NOX gas composition which will lead to better understanding of the reaction mechanism. Once the mechanism is evaluated, it will pave way for designing a better continuous dissolution system for the evolution of a robust fast reactor fuel reprocessing technology.
Experimental
The dissolution experiments were carried out using typical natural UO2 fuel pellets supplied by the Nuclear Fuel Complex (NFC), Hyderabad. The pellets used for the experiments were all cylindrical and sintered in nature. The pellets were covered with SS sheet completely along the curved surface area to simulate the presence of clad during the actual processing of spent nuclear fuel which is reprocessed by chop-leach process. The physical charac- teristics of the pellets used for the studies are same as those reported earlier [31].
The schematic sketch of the experimental set up is shown in Fig. 1 and the actual set up in Fig. 2. The dis- solution reactor is a cylindrical glass container as shown in Figs. 1 and 2. The lid has a flange with a PTFE gasket to which a polypropylene clamp is fitted to make the reactor sufficiently airtight when closed. The lid has sufficient number of openings to insert a thermowell, glass shaft with impeller for agitating the reaction mixture, an off-gas condenser followed by sodium hydroxide scrubbers and nozzles for sampling and adding reagents/reactants.
The entire reactor sits into a cup shaped heating mantle which ensures uniform heating of the entire reaction mix- ture. The heating mantle is fitted with a Pt-100 RTD sensor with an accuracy of ±0.3 °C, which is positioned into the thermowell of the glass dissolver during experiments for
Fig. 1 Schematic sketch of the experimental set-up
Fig. 2 Experimental set-up
the temperature control. This was calibrated prior to the actual experiments for accurate measurements of the tem- perature well above and below the range of the tempera- tures to be employed for this study.
In each experiment, required amount of acid of specific concentration is first taken in the reactor and preheated to the desired temperature. Once the set temperature is reached, the pellet is lowered carefully and the timer is started. At periodic intervals of time, sample was taken from the reaction mixture and analyzed for [U(VI)],
[HNO3] and [HNO2]. At the same intervals, samples were also collected from the off-gas scrubbers for analyzing the composition of NOX gases. Uranium was analysed spec- trophotometrically using pyridine azo resorcinol as the chromogenic reagent [32]. Free acidity was determined by titrimetry using a standard alkali with prior complexation of metal ions using a suitable ligand. Nitrous acid was measured by quenching the sample aliquot in known excess of sodium hydroxide and analyzing the total nitrate and nitrite concentration by ion chromatography from which the nitrous acid concentration is back calculated using the stoichiometric reaction between nitrous acid and sodium hydroxide [33]. Similarly the NOX gas composition was determined by analyzing the amount of nitrate and nitrite ions formed in the sodium hydroxide scrubbers kept in the off-gas streams. All the experiments were carried out at 80 °C and 8 M starting acidity which are the conditions prevailing in a typical PUREX plant. The stirring rate was altered from 0 to 1500 rpm.
Results and discussion
When UO2 dissolves in nitric acid, it produces NO and NO2 as per for the following reactions [33, 34].
@1
@2
@3
Reaction (1) occurs predominantly when the acidity is above 8 M. As the typical acidity encountered in a purex process ranges from 3 to 8 M, it’s the reactions (2) and (3) which takes place predominantly. The ratio of nitric acid consumed to uranium dissolved during the course of our dissolution experiments, which was around 2.7, reconfirms this fact.
UO2 dissolution in nitric acid is an oxidative process as U(IV) in the solid is oxidized to U(VI) in liquid. Thus the presence of nitrous acid, a good oxidizing agent and pro- duced in situ during the dissolution at the pellet-surface as given in Eq. (4) [17], greatly enhances the dissolution  rate.
@4
The nitrous acid so produced, finally decomposes as per the following reaction.
@5
Thus the Eq. (3) given above is the algebraic addition of Eqs. (4) and (5).
Effect of mixing on the dissolution kinetics
It has been observed that when the reaction mixture is stirred vigorously, the rate of UO2 dissolution decreases significantly. It is postulated that this is due to the decrease in the concentration of nitrous acid produced at the pellet surface. The nitrous acid produced at the pellet surface as per reaction (4), on mixing diffuses into the bulk of the solution across the liquid film which is present between the solid surface and the solid–liquid interphase. This is due to the concentration gradient of nitrous acid from the pellet surface, where it will be higher at the moment of its gen- eration, and the bulk of the liquid. But as soon as the nitrous acid comes to bulk or even during its diffusion through the liquid stream into its bulk, it decomposes to NOX gases as per Eq. (5). Thus its availability at the pellet surface is reduced. This effect is more pronounced at higher mixing intensity of the liquid bulk which is the reason for the reduction in the dissolution rate of UO2 as the mixing intensity is increased. As an added effect, the rate of decomposition of nitrous acid is also enhanced with mixing [35] resulting in further reduction of dissolution rate. Experiments were formulated to test this hypothesis by monitoring the nitrous acid concentration in the bulk reaction mixture along with uranium during the course of dissolution.
The time taken for complete dissolution at various mixing rate is given in Fig. 3 which shows that increasing the mixing intensity leads to slower dissolution rates.
From Fig. 3, it can be seen that for the given dimensions of the dissolution vessel and other conditions like tem- perature and acidity remaining constant, the dissolution rate doesn’t vary practically beyond 600 RPM. Hence it can be concluded that starting from 600 RPM and above the diffusion control of the reaction is at its barest mini- mum. Hence the rate of the reaction to be determined under such condition would be predominantly chemical reaction
Fig. 3 Effect of mixing on the dissolution time
controlled and intrinsic in nature. We have already reported the rate parameters for the reaction elsewhere [33].
Role of nitrous acid on UO2 dissolution kinetics
It is well known that for any solid dissolving in a liquid, the reaction takes place at the solid surface [36]. As UO2 dissolves oxidatively, presence of nitrous acid, which is a strong oxidizing agent, in the proximity to the pellet sur- face should catalyze the reaction. It is known that nitrous acid is generated at the pellet solution interface during UO2 dissolution in nitric acid [17]. Hence this is an autocatalytic reaction wherein one of the products formed; nitrous acid in this case, catalyzes the reaction. Therefore nitrous acid was measured in the bulk of the reaction mixture during the course of all the dissolution experiments and is given in Fig. 4. It indicates that by about the first 150 min in all the dissolution experiments, the concentration of nitrous acid reaches its maximum irrespective of the mixing intensity and gradually stabilizes at various levels depending on the intensity of agitation.
Nitrous acid once generated, is consumed in two ways, namely, its self-decomposition as per Eq. 4 and its reaction with UO2 solid to generate more UO22? ions in the liquid  as per the reaction given below [23].
@6
When the mixing rate is higher, nitrous acid gets dis- persed faster and its self-decomposition rate is also higher [37]. Hence its availability for the dissolution reaction as per Eq. (6) is reduced thereby decreasing the overall dis- solution rate. At lower mixing intensity, nitrous acid spends more time at the vicinity of the interface and thereby its consumption by reaction (6) to dissolve more
Fig. 4 Nitrous acid concentration profile in the bulk liquid during dissolution
UO2 dominates over its self-decomposition. This is indi- cated by the increase in dissolution rate at lower mixing rate from Fig. 3.
The schematic concentration profile of nitrous acid at the solid surface ([HNO2]s) and in the bulk liquid ([HNO2]b) and how it changes at various mixing rates is represented in Fig. 5.
Nitrous acid is produced at the solid surface by the reaction (4). The nitrous so produced is consumed by two different ways, one by aiding in further dissolution of UO2 as given in reaction (6) and the other by its self-decom- position as given below.
@7
Both these reactions compete with each other and col- lectively contribute for the overall concentration profile of nitrous acid in the reaction system. Reaction (6)  takes place at the solid surface and hence it requires the presence of nitrous acid at the surface. At higher stirring speed, the diffusion of nitrous acid into the bulk liquid is higher. Hence the dissolution reaction rate is decreased and the concentration gradient of nitrous acid between the solid  surface and the bulk liquid is less. While at reduced mixing rate, the diffusion of nitrous acid is also reduced due to which it spends more time at the vicinity of the solid sur-face and significantly aids in further dissolution of UO2.
Thus its concentration is lesser in the bulk liquid and the nitrous acid concentration gradient is also higher. In addition it has been reported in the literature that the Fig. 5 Schematic representation of the effect of mixing intensity on the nitrous acid concentration profiles in the reaction system
kinetics of nitrous acid decomposition (reaction 7) is rea- sonably slow [38] which explains the higher concentration of nitrous acid in the bulk when the reaction mixture is stirred vigorously.
To further ascertain the catalytic role of nitrous acid on the oxidative dissolution of UO2 in nitric acid, the reaction was carried out in presence of hydrazine which destroys nitrous acid instantaneously [39]. The concentration pro- files of uranium and nitrous acid are graphically shown in Figs. 6 and 7 respectively in the presence and absence of hydrazine, which indicates that as long as hydrazine is not present in the reaction mixture, there is a steady increase in both uranium and nitrous acid. In its presence, hydrazine reacts with nitrous acid instantaneously and consumes it thereby reducing its availability. This in turn retards the oxidative dissolution of uranium. When its addition is stopped, the reaction starts taking place as indicated by the increase in the concentration of uranium and nitrous acid in the reaction mixture. This confirms the autocatalytic role of nitrous acid during the oxidative dissolution of UO2 in nitric acid.
The results also indicates clearly that during the disso- lution of thermal reactor spent fuel in nitric acid wherein more than 99% of actinide elements is uranium, the dis- solution would be faster in unstirred condition. Though agitation of the spent fuel is required to establish better contact between nitric acid and the spent fuel particles present inside the chopped clad pieces, the above results translates the fact that if we can supply excess nitrous acid into the dissolver solution either by the addition of sodium nitrite or by sparging NO2 gas, the reaction would proceed faster thereby increasing the plant production rates. Thus optimization of dissolution parameters such as agitation and sparging with NO2 gas would greatly enhance the dissolution rate.
Fig. 6 Effect of hydrazine on the [U] profile during dissolution
Fig. 7 Effect of hydrazine on the [HNO2] profile during dissolution
Mechanism of UO2 dissolution in nitric acid under typical PUREX process conditions
As mentioned earlier in this article, Eqs. (1–3) represent the stoichiometric dissolution reaction of UO2 in nitric acid. Reaction (1) occurs predominantly when the acid concentration is above 8 M and the rest of the two takes  place predominantly below 8 M acidity. The typical ratio of the amount of acid consumed to the amount of U
might be possible. Unlike NO, the NO2 concentration is very low initially but at 600 min, it becomes equal to the NO concentration which is almost half of the product concentration. This shows that the reaction proceeds according to reaction (3) after 600 min (Fig. 9).
Figure 10 depicts the formation of Nitrous Acid with respect to time. It can be seen that the formation of nitrous acid is very rapid initially, and then it acquires almost constant value for some time and then decreases depending on the speed of stirrer.
The decrease is high for low stirring speed where as it is not much significant at high stirring speeds. Also the amount of Nitrous acid formation is high which cannot be explained by reaction (2). Hence it can be assumed that reaction (3) is being followed rather than reaction (2).
The mechanism of the dissolution of UO2 can be explained by dividing the dissolution process into 3 dif- ferent time zones as given in Fig. 11.
Zone 1: (0–300 min)
The dissolution of UO2 is initiated and the reaction takes place according to the reaction (3) which takes place is two steps [17] as given below.dis- solved during the course of our dissolution experiments, whose conditions are
that of a typical Purex process (8 M nitric acid and 80 °C), under varying stirring spend is given in Fig. 8 below.
Analysis of Fig. 8 shows that the ratio of [H?] con- sumed to [U] dissolved is always between 2.7 and 3 all
through the dissolution process. This indicates that it is the reactions (2) and (3) which are taking place predominantly. The experimental data was plotted and the reaction mechanism was proposed by analyzing the plots of for- mation of UO2(NO3)2, NO, NO2, HNO2 and depletion of HNO3 with respect to time. Figure 8 indicates that the formation of NO is almost 0.5–0.6 times of the formation of product, further confirming that reactions (2) and (3)
@8
@9
Hence, whatever nitrous acid that is formed initially during the dissolution reaction, immediately diffuses into the bulk and attains equilibrium. Subsequently it dissoci- ates into NO and NO2. NO being less soluble in water escapes out [40], whereas NO2 reacts with water to form HNO2 and HNO3 according to the equation
@10
Fig. 9 concentration profiles of NO, NO2 and half U during dissolution
Fig. 10 Formation of Nitrous Acid at different RPM during disso- lution of UO2
Fig. 11 Various zones of the reaction
Zone 2: (300–600 min)
In this time zone, the nitrous acid concentration reaches equilibrium and it is almost constant. Hence the nitrous acid produced instantaneously dissociates into NO and NO2. The generation of new surface allows some of the nitrous acid to get adsorbed on the surface of UO2 and catalyze further dissolution of UO2 which leads to an increase in the rate of reaction as indicated by the increase in the slope of [U] plot in this time zone (Figs. 12, 13, 14).
Zone 3: (600–1200 min)
Due to the catalytic effect of nitrous acid in zone 2, more UO2 solid gets dissolved. Hence the surface area available
Fig. 12  Formation of NO, NO2, HNO2 and U in zone 1
Fig. 13  Formation of NO, NO2, HNO2 and U in zone 2
Fig. 14  Formation of NO, NO2, HNO2 and U in zone 4
for the reaction goes down and the catalytic effect decreases. Also the reaction of NO2 with water (reaction 9) reaches equilibrium, thus following the same trend as of NO formation.
Hence to sum up the reaction mechanism it can be concluded that the dissolution of UO2 under typical purex process conditions proceeds predominantly by Eq. 3 which takes place in two steps as depicted in Eqs. (8) and (9). Subsequently the NO2 produced in the reaction reacts with water as per Eq. (10). Hence the overall stoichiometric
reaction is the algebraic sum of Eqs. (8–10) which is given below in Eq. (11).
@11
This overall stoichiometric consumption of nitric acid is what is seen in all our dissolution runs irrespective of the stirring speed which indicates that this mechanism holds well under all conditions of a typical PUREX process
Conclusions
The mechanism of UO2 dissolution was established by analyzing the data obtained from the experiment. It was seen that UO2 initially reacts with Nitric Acid to form Nitrous Acid which quickly diffuses into the system and then dissociates to form NOx. Later on as the diffusion process is slowed down the dissociation of Nitrous acid can be considered to take place before it diffuses into the system. NO2 formed from the dissociation reaction, reacts with water to again form Nitrous Acid which settles down on the surface of the reactant particle and catalyzes the reaction, before coming to equilibrium. The catalytic effect reduces as the concentration of the reactant and surface area decrease until all of UO2 is reacted.
Acknowledgements
This work forms a part of the PhD thesis of Desigan who acknowledges HNBI for giving him an opportunity to pursue his research work. He also acknowledges the support given by the management of IGCAR in carrying out the experimental work pertaining to this research project.
