<title>DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY IN NONDESTRUCTIVE MONITORING OF NUCLEAR MATERIALS</title>
<Affiliation>National Research Nuclear University MEPhI (Moscow Engineering Physics Institute), Moscow, Russia. Translated from Atomnaya Énergiya, </Affiliation>
<author>V.  L. Romodanov and A. G. Belevitin</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-015-0028-0</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-015-0028-0</URL>
Abstract
The use of scintillation detectors in combination with digital technology for obtaining separate responses of neutrons and photons in the field of mixed radioactive radiation is examined. An experimental arrangement and algorithms of a program for separating neutron and photon responses, according to their form, and  a program for calculating the rates of real coincidences of different multiplicity are  presented. Data      on measurements of the differential rates of real coincidences of neutrons and photons in the field of a californium source are presented.
The development and construction of new-generation systems for nondestructive monitoring of fissile and radio- active materials in articles and wastes from nuclear power generation are problems whose solutions largely determine the operational safety of nuclear facilities and nonproliferation of nuclear materials. For this reason, the development of new physical methods makes it possible to expand the functional possibilities of setups for detecting and monitoring the nuclide composition of fissile materials in closed containers and at the same time decrease their manufacturing costs.
Analog electronic blocks are now used in nondestructive testing setups. Current advances in technology make it pos- sible to digitize scintillation signals and store the results in computer memory. Digital technology for separating neutron and photon responses leads to the new concept for counting neutrons and neutron coincidences in setups used for nondestructive monitoring of nuclear materials. Instead of analog blocks it is possible to use a computer, whose programs make it possible to extract from sequences of neutron and photon responses functionals characterizing fissile materials. A pulsed neutron generator in combination with a moderator makes it possible to produce neutrons with different energy in a single setup; this significantly expands the possibilities for monitoring.
Analysis shows that there are no domestically developed monitoring setups using digital technology while abroad such setups are in the experimental development stage [1, 2]. This drives the development of software system for processing a digitized sequence of signals from scintillation detectors, picking an optimal algorithm for the software, and experimental testing of new physical methods of monitoring nuclear materials.
Algorithm and Software for Separating Neutron and Photon Scintillation Responses of a Detector. The exper- imental data can take the following forms depending on the type of source of ionizing radiation:
1)the numerical sequence of each measuring channel is recorded in one file; this data type is created during contin- uous operation of the radiation source;
2)the number of files for each measurement channel equals the number of starts of a pulsed source; this data type is created when using a pulsed neutron generator with pulse repetition frequency 5–20 Hz; in this case, after each neutron pulse the digitized sequence is stored in the buffer memory of an ADC and then copied into a separate file on the computer’s hard drive; and
3)the numerical sequence of each measuring channel is written in a single file; a digitized sequence of the signal level for triggering the neutron generator is contained in an additional file; this data type is created for a pulsed neutron Fig. 1. Appearance of the digitized sequence before (a) and after (b) adjustment of the baseline (LSB – Least Significant Bit, determining the minimum step of the change in the digitized signal).
generator with pulse repetition frequency 0.1–10 kHz; an additional file is used to determine the start time of the source, which is necessary in order to construct the time distribution of the responses.
The volume of experimental files can be several gigabytes, which is often greater the size of the computer memory.
For this reason the file is loaded into memory in parts of prescribed length.
When working with a pulsed neutron generator emitting more than 106 neutrons per pulse, the measuring channel becomes overloaded, and this distorts the baseline of the signal level. For this reason, an algorithm for adjusting it was de- veloped. It consists in describing the distorted baseline of the smooth curve and then subtracting its values from the initial numerical sequence (Fig. 1). The moment at which the neutron and photon responses are detected is determined according to the intersection of the floating level, which the program sets between the minimum and maximum levels, by the left-hand front of the response.
For a high-intensity source of radioactive radiation, there is a high probability the recorded response is superposed on the preceding response. It is considered to be the support for the analyzed response. The degree of superposition of the analyzed response is characterized by a parameter expressed in percent, equal to the ratio of the amplitude of the response to the support before it. The investigations showed that for superposition up to 100% the responses studied can be identified reliably after subtracting the support (Fig. 2).
An important requirement is that misidentifications of photon responses as neutron responses must be eliminated. The algorithm permits filtering the processed responses; responses with a distorted shape are rejected. For this, a time interval
where a function of the form
@
where t is the time, fits the response is singled out in the numerical sequence representing the analyzed response. The least- squares method was used to determine the parameters A, a, B, b, and C, c.
Fig. 2. Determination of the support (1) of the superposed response (2) with 58% superposition.
Fig. 3. Area ratio used for identifying the pulses: 1) prescribed level;
2) start of processing interval.
The point where the left-hand front of the response intersects a given level served as the start of the time interval.
The software set the level and duration of the interval.
A form factor characterizing the deviation of the response from the fitting function is calculated for each response. If this parameter exceeds a prescribed value, then the response is rejected. The specification for the form of the responses can be increased or decreased by increasing or decreasing the admissible form factor. Increasing the admissible value increases the quality of the sample of filtered responses, but the number of rejected responses increases. For this reason, the choice of the admissible form factor depends on the problem to be solved. The response of the detected particles is identified by dif- ferent methods [3]. In the present work, the area ratio S2/S1 was used as the parameter for separating the neutron and photon responses (Fig. 3). The bounds of the sections are prescribed.
An extensive set of graphical and numerical representations was used to analyze the separation results. One of the graphical windows serves to extract diagrams each point of which corresponds to a neutron or photon response. The ampli- tude is measured along the ordinate and the separation parameter or form factor is measured along the abscissa. Examples of these point diagrams are displayed in Fig. 4. Analysis of the diagrams so obtained was used to pick rejected responses. Upon picking one of the points in the diagram, the plot of the corresponding signal is displayed in the graphical window. The discrimination curves in Fig. 4a make it possible during or at the completion of processing to reject responses that do not fall
Fig. 4. Point diagrams: 1–5) discrimination curves.
Fig. 5. Block diagram of the experiment.
into the regions 1–2 and 3–4 bounded by the curves. The discrimination curve 5 in Fig. 4b makes it possible upon processing to reject all responses falling to the right-hand side of it in the diagram.
The rejection of the responses leads to a reduction of their number in the amplitude and time distributions and a distortion of the form of the distributions. Ordinarily, the low-amplitude responses are rejected. When working with a pulse neutron generator, the loading of the measuring channel decreases with time after the pulse and for this reason the probability of superposition of the responses and, therefore, the probability of a response being rejected also depends on the time. To take account of these effects, the program determines the amplitude and recording time of the rejected signal, retains and subse- quently uses them to introduce corrections for missed counts during the calculation of the amplitude and time distributions. The introduction of corrections was based on the supposition that the number of rejected neutron and photon responses is
proportional to the identified responses with corresponding amplitude and time of detection.
Purpose of the Digital Technology Software System. A computer software system developed as a general com- bined computational structure for digital technology makes it possible to determine the following characteristics of mixed neutron and photon fields:
1)separate time distributions of neutrons and photons of mixed radiation (analog of a time analyzer);
2)separate amplitude distribution of recoil protons and Compton electrons (analog of a spectrometer); and
3)time distribution of coincidences of different multiplicity for neutrons and photons upon fission of fissile materials (analog of coincidence circuits).
Fig. 6. Counting rate of differential coincidences n–n (1), ƒ–n (2), and ƒ–ƒ (3), total double (4) coincidence (a) and n–n–n (1), ƒ–ƒ–n (2), ƒ–n–n (3), and ƒ–ƒ–ƒ (4), total triple (5) coincidence (b).
The results of processing are presented in the form of tables, diagrams, and plots additionally supplemented by means for analyzing them. The algorithm and program for separating the response of neutrons and photons of mixed radiation perform the following functions:
1)determination of the baseline of the amplitude-time distribution when operating with pulsed sources of radiation and the correction of the baseline;
2)selection of the amplitude-time distribution of responses corresponding to the neutron and photon radiation;
3)fitting the responses by an analytic function of two or three exponential terms;
4)identification of the responses by amplitude;
5)rejection of responses with distorted shapes;
6)identification of neutrons and photons by the shape of the response;
7)determination of time markers – neutron and photon detection times;
8)evaluation of the amplitude distribution of neutron and photon responses; and
9)storing on a hard drive the results of processing.
The file with the time markers of identified neutron and photon responses is transferred into software for calculating the time distribution of the real coincidences of the responses.
This problem was examined in [4, 5]. The software described in the present article makes it possible to determine the time distribution of the differential counting rates of particle coincidences of the form neutron–neutron, photon–photon, neu- tron–photon, photon–photon–neutron, and so on, as well as the total rate of coincidences neglecting the type of response.
A check showed the correctness of the determination of the rates of differential coincidences. For this, the time dis- tribution of the coincidence rates was summed within prescribed limits. The rate of differential coincidences neutron–neutron,
Fig. 7. Ratio of the counting rates of double coincidences ƒ/n (1), ƒ–ƒ/n–n (2), ƒ–ƒ/ƒ–n (3), and ƒ–n/n–n (4) in a container with iron (a) and water (b) shielding.
photon–photon, neutrom–photon, and photon–neutron comprises a complete set of possible double coincidences, and there- fore their sum must equal the total rate of coincidences.
Experiment. The software developed for separating the responses of neutrons and photons with a determination  of the differential counting rates of their coincidences of different multiplicity has been tested on an experiment with a cal- ifornium source of neutrons. The source was place at the center of a setup consisting of four hydrogen-containing EJ-309
scintillators manufactured in the USA. A scintillator comprised a 250 × 250 × 80 mm parallelepiped. A californium source of
neutrons with yield ~5·104 seс–1, surrounded by a protective layer of water or iron of different thickness, was located inside the scintillation system (Fig. 5). A four-channel digital system (Russia) with digitization frequency 1 GHz was used.
The software developed makes it possible to determine the counting rate of differential coincidences of neutrons and photons of the californium source of double, triple, and in some cases quadruple multiplicity in the interval 1–20 nsec after a fission event. The physically validated dependences of the time distribution of the differential rates of coincidences of
neutrons and photons of different type are shown in Fig. 6. This formulation of the experiment opens the prospect of deter- mining the amount of fissile material, for example, 240Pu , in closed containers with identification of the matrix and protective materials. An external source for irradiating the fissile material in a container must be used in order to monitor 235U and 239Pu.
Experiments where the rate of double, triple, and quadruple coincidences behind the protective layer of water and iron of different thickness were determined were performed. The results of such experiments for double coincidences of neu- trons and photons are shown in Fig. 7 as examples. Analysis showed that the set of ratios of double coincidences characterizes the type and thickness of the protective material, which makes it possible to use these ratios to identify the type of protection and size. This method can be used to determine the matrix materials in closed containers as well as to identify different sourc- es neutrons and photons by means of their spectra.
Conclusion. The digital technology in new-generation management systems for nuclear materials has the following advantages:
1)wider range of physical methods of monitoring by using different neutron energies and the properties of fast scin- tillation systems, separately detecting neutrons and photons with the use of 3He counters of thermal neutrons;
2)digital separation of time responses of neutron and photons with large loads of the scintillation channels, making it possible to count the coincidences of particles of different type and different multiplicity;
3)determination of the composition of fissile materials by processing digitized data without analog electronic blocks, which reduce their nomenclature and thereby lowers the cost of nuclear systems; and
4)creation of digitized databases of experimental results, which makes it possible to reprocess than using new com- puter programs.
The following are among the basic problems of using the new digital technology based on scintillation systems for detecting neutrons and photons:
1)monitoring unirradiated and irradiated fuel assemblies of nuclear reactors;
2)monitoring and inventorying nuclear materials in the balance zones;
3)determination of the nuclide and quantitative composition of nuclear materials in the wastes;
4)analysis of mixed uranium-plutonium fuel;
5)monitoring of the composition and matrix elements in closed volumes without opening them;
6)identification of nuclear materials in closed containers;
7)detection of radioactive and fissile materials at the points of intersection of state borders (airports, seaports); and
8)dosimetry in mixed neutron and photon fields taking account of the quality of the radiation.
The technology of digital separation of the scintillation responses of neutron and photons and measurement based on it of the differential counting rates of coincidences have shown that its application in combination with new physical methods makes it possible to develop high-tech efficient and cost-effective setups for nondestructive monitoring with expanded func- tional possibilities.
