<title>Load-following with nuclear power: Market eﬀects and welfare implications</title>
<author>R. Loisel, V. Alexeeva, A. Zucker, D. Shropshire</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Université de Nantes, IEMN-IEA, Lemna, France
b.IAEA, International Atomic Energy Agency, Planning and Economic Studies Section, Vienna, Austria
c.European Commission, DG Joint Research Centre, Institute for Energy and Transport, the Netherlands</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.08.011</DOI>
<URLhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.08.011</URL>
ABSTRACT
This paper analyses the economic factors that drive nuclear power load-following in future European electricity systems. A power plant dispatching model is built to simulate deregulated markets, in order to identify to what extent additional ﬂexibility is needed from nuclear power due to more renewables. We contribute to the lit- erature with an economic perspective of the nuclear load-following by means of numerical simulations of several European power systems that will pursue the nuclear policy in 2050. Results show that intermittency  would  make ﬂexible nuclear reactors cycling more often and retire earlier. The highest  requirements  for  ﬂexibility would be in systems with high shares of nuclear, renewables or coal-ﬁred plants (Central-Western Europe and certain Central-Eastern European countries) and in systems with low grid interconnections (Western Europe and South-West). Load-following implies lower capacity factors for nuclear plants, except for Central-Western Europe where operating ﬂexibly would allow reactors to supply more output than in steady-state mode. The lowest generation cost is found in Nordic countries where most of the ﬂexibility is provided by hydro-units, and hence nuclear power plants operate mostly baseload. Ensuring ﬂexibility becomes ﬁnancially interesting when nuclear power plants are not the marginal technology setting the clearing price; in this way the infra-marginal rent    allows operators to capture high revenues. It is shown that nuclear ﬂexibility is proﬁtable from a broader social welfare perspective, such as safe baseload units' operation, renewables' integration, system operators' balancing, and consumer's price.
Keywords:
Intermittency    Nuclear   Load-following    System costs     Social welfare
1.Introduction
The European Energy Roadmap to 2050 frames the energy transi- tion by setting out four routes to decarbonisation, such as energy eﬃ- ciency, renewables, nuclear energy and carbon capture and storage (EC, 2011). The decarbonisation objective involves high rates of renewables,
e.g. between 55% and 97% in the ﬁnal power demand by 2050, along with a signiﬁcant contribution from nuclear energy in those countries where a pro nuclear policy is pursued. The interaction between inter- mittent renewables and the conventional technology mix is a matter of concern for policy makers for both short-run dispatching of generators and long-run investment planning in new power plants.
This research evaluates the requirements for nuclear ﬂexibility and the cost-beneﬁt aspects in various power systems in European Union (EU). Countries have been selected due the variety of drivers inﬂuen- cing the operation of nuclear power plants (NPP), such as diﬀerent renewables levels, generation technology mix and grid interconnection with the neighbouring markets.
The literature is rich in papers dedicated to the ﬂexibility of power
plants and their ability to follow the load. Firstly, cycling comes with costs. Kumar et al. (2012) estimate that from cold to warm and hot start, load-following costs in the United States are in the range of 0.6–1.9$/MW for gas-ﬁred units and of 2.0–3.4$/MW for coal-ﬁred units. Troy et al. (2010) show that the number of start-ups of thermal units in the Irish power system increases with the wind energy share; yet at higher than 30% wind rates, the start-ups for coal units decrease with raising primary reserve supply. Flexible NPPs operating load-fol- lowing will bear additional costs with the retroﬁt and design conver- sion, O&M costs due to the wear of components, some fuel costs, staﬀ costs and intensiﬁed safety measures (IAEA, 2018).
Secondly, load-following compresses load factors of conventional generators, down to 62% for nuclear power plants and to 7% for gas- ﬁred units in Europe, which could reduce the ﬁnancial incentives to invest in baseload and peak capacities (Ketterer, 2014; Wurzburg et al., 2013; Bertsch et al., 2016). The compression eﬀect could be even stronger, e.g. 40%, if nuclear was to substitute all ﬂexible technologies and imports (Cany et al., 2016). Currently, the loss due to the load- following is estimated at 135,000–250,000 €/day for a nuclear plant of
1,400 MW operating in Europe (OECD-NEA, 2012a). It is shown that a viable model of baseload operation in front of renewables is possible only if nuclear plants co-generate power and heat as well, e.g. for dis- trict heating, desalination and hydrogen production (Locatelli et al., 2017), or for biomass conversion into liquid transport fuels (Forsberg, 2009).
From a system perspective, nuclear load-following can maximise the social welfare, as shown in Lykidi and Gourdel (2015) by means of an optimisation model with monthly time-steps. These aggregated models often ignore signiﬁcant ramping ups and downs and the daily and hourly pressure put on reactors. Instead, highly detailed time-resolution models are needed to accurately test the ramping requirements (Komiyama and Fujii, 2015). The need for nuclear power generation to be more ﬂexible with faster ramping rates is one of the important fac- tors in determining the design of the future nuclear reactors, such as to follow the development of energy markets (Magwood and Paillere, 2018; Nourbakhsh et al., 2018).
This research builds tools to simulate future power markets and the cycling needs from NPPs. For potential excessive cycling, we use cost estimates of reactors' upgrading and assess the potential beneﬁts from operating load-following. We next deﬁne the capability of NPP to op- erate ﬂexibly. Then we describe the methodology based on power plant dispatching. Numerical ﬁndings will depict the value of the nuclear ﬂexibility provision and the key drivers of nuclear power economics in the future.
2.Nuclear capability to provide ﬂexibility
By deﬁnition, load-following represents the change in the genera- tion of electricity to match the expected electricity demand as closely as possible (IAEA, 2018). In practice, countries with large nuclear power shares (France) and high intermittent renewables (Germany), need NPPs to operate load-following. In other systems, load-following is currently not licensed (Spain) or needs approval from system operators and nuclear national safety authorities (USA; EPRI, 2014).
Load-following is measured by the transient from full power to minimum load and back to full power. Technically, the modern light water nuclear reactors can operate ﬂexibly once or twice per day in the range of 100% to 50%–25% of the rated power, with a ramp rate of up to 5% of rated power per minute (OECD-NEA, 2011). The number of cycles is limited to 2 operations per day, 5 per week, cumulatively 200 per year (EUR, 2012). In practice, two situations occur: frequent load- following over a small range of the rated thermal power, the so-called light cycles; and less frequent cycling but over a large range of the rated power, or deep cycles (IAEA, 2018). The amplitude is in the range of 100%–60% of the nominal power for light cycles, and between 100% and 25% for deep cycles (AREVA, 2009; EDF, 2013). Fig. 1 represents cycles with diﬀerent durations and amplitudes, distinguishing short from long cycles and deep from light cycles.
Ludwig et al. (2010) analyse the licence of a German Pressurized Water Reactor (PWR) and deﬁne the transient budget of cycles, as being the number of cycles with bounded amplitude allowed over the plant lifetime.
Table Reading. A PWR reactor could perform 100,000 cycles of 10% of the rated power amplitude over the plant lifetime (a 10% depth cycle goes  from  100%  of  the  rated  power  to  90%  and  back  to  100%).  The reactor can also perform 100,000 cycles of 20% depth, 15,000 cycles of 40% depth and 12,000 cycles of 60% depth.
Load-following allowed by the licence of a ﬂexible reactor (Table 1)is provided for in a planned manner,1 and this enhances no additional
Fig. 1. Load-following capability of a PWR by cycle type.
Table 1
The design of PWR Konvoi reactor. Sources: Ludwig et al. (2010).
cost. By contrast, unplanned cycling would account for more fuel costs due to a reduced usage of uranium during one refuelling cycle, e.g. in the range of 17–34% of the initial fuel cost (Persson et al., 2012). Planning load-following requires a good management of the NPP fuel, such as to anticipate the usage rate of the uranium at the beginning of the cycle (IAEA, 2018). However, neither practice nor literature could defend a robust cost estimate of cycling based on the speed and the frequency of generator ramping up and down. Next the eﬀective op- eration of NPPs in terms of cycling is compared with the licensed transient budget in order to identify cases with additional reactor fa- tigue requiring upgrading.
3.Methodology. Model. Scenarios
3.1.Methodology
Assumptions. A power plant dispatching model is built to simulate major technology types in the European power systems and to ensure the hourly equilibrium supply-demand (Fig. 2). The study case covers deregulated power markets, which implies that power plants are called as a function of their position in the merit order curve.2 The study case selects deregulated markets where the nuclear plants are paid at the spot market price. Regulated markets instead would apply a full-cost recovery policy, based on nuclear levelised cost of electricity.
The model simulates the base year 2012 and the projection year 2050 in those countries with future nuclear power projects. The EU-28 Member States are grouped into ﬁve market regions. By 2050, thirteen countries plan to pursue using nuclear energy, according to the EU Reference Scenario EC (2013).3 By region, these countries are as
Fig. 2. Model's Input-Output ﬂows  representation.
follows: 1) Region North - Finland and Sweden; 2) Region Central- Western Europe (CWE) - France and The Netherlands; 3) Region Cen- tral-Eastern Europe (CEE) - Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Li- thuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia; 4) Region Western Europe (WEE) - United Kingdom; 5) Region South-Western Europe (SWE) - Spain.
The model we build integrates the installed generation capacities such as projected by the European Commission (EC, 2013), and assumes ﬁxed power demand at each hour and endogenous export-import ﬂows, constrained by the power interconnection grid capacity.
Inputs. The model simulates power system operation in 2012 and 2050. Model inputs are the power plants' installed capacity (see section 3.3), operating costs and technological parameters such as eﬃciency, ramping rates, carbon emission coeﬃcients, availability of plants, maximum capacity factors, and minimum security operation con- straints.
Outputs. After simulation, the model returns the power volume generated by each technology, the hourly power price, the system cost and derived indicators such as actual load factors, curtailment rates and carbon emissions. The reactors' ﬂexibility provision is converted into light and deep cycles which are further compared with the licenced design to conclude on the nature of cycling and potential upgrading. The economics of the nuclear power is set with the indicators of the Net Present Value and the Levelised Cost of Electricity (Annex 1).
A reactor can use the cycling budget before the lifetime ending, leading to early retirement or to baseload operation for the remaining lifetime. In case of upgrading, the plant could continue operating ﬂexibly after reinvestments into components renewal and additional
corrective actions. Based on the experience of European reactors modernisation, this cost would be around 1000 €/kWe (OECD-NEA, 2012b; The French Court of Auditors, 2016).
3.2.Power plant dispatching model
A partial equilibrium model is built to endogenously select power supplying technologies such as to meet ﬁxed demand on an hourly basis. The literature is rich with energy models adapted to various to- pics, such as the investment planning of the energy infrastructure (EC- JRC, 2013), the cost of system balancing (OECD-NEA, 2012a), and the eﬀect of renewables on electricity prices (Clo and D'Adamo, 2015; Ketterer, 2014; Wurzburg et al., 2013; Traber and Kemfert, 2011), etc. Our power plant dispatching model is based on linear programming, implemented in the GAMS software with the Cplex solver.4 The method used for solving the linear problem is a deterministic gradient-free method, where the objective function and the design variables are as- sociated with bounds and constraints in order to ensure the global optimal solution. Equations are listed in the Annex 1. The program minimises the annual system costs of operating power plants, deﬁned as the sum of variable costs, the carbon price, the variable operation and maintenance costs, and the import costs. Note that this is a short-term system cost, which excludes the long-run investment in the generation and transmission infrastructure. The model assumes thus ﬁxed installed
capacities over the simulation period.
Dynamic principles describe the system operation over one year, with 8760 time slices. The hourly power market equilibrium is insured such that the supply from domestic technologies and imports equals the national demand and exports, including losses and charging storage plants. When the system cannot absorb the natural inﬂow of ﬂuctuating renewables (wind, solar and hydro run-of-river power), the energy excess is supressed, the so-called curtailment or lost load.
The technical constraints are minimum operational loads, maximum load factors, and ramping capability of ﬂexible  technologies  (see Table 2.1 in the Annex 2).
Minimum load factors are ﬁxed for combined heat and power (CHP) plants, for nuclear plants and hydropower plants. Constraints on CHP are set at 10% of the nominal capacity, to reﬂect the obligation to produce heat and to deal with the missing heat demand in the model. Minimum load constraints for nuclear are set at 40% of the nominal capacity, in order to account for limitations at the beginning and the end of refuelling campaign, and to avoid low eﬃciency rates and an- cillary disturbances in the operation and maintenance of the reactors.5 Constraints are set at 5% of the nominal power for hydropower plants with reservoirs to avoid complete ﬁlling out.
Maximum load factors deﬁne the maximum use of a technology due to a limited natural resource inﬂow, to the power plant unavailability, or to political will to limit the use of imported fuels.
Load-following with ﬂexible technologies is made possible with hourly ramping rates, which describe how fast power plants can mod- ulate the output from 1 h to the next one. Flexible nuclear power re- actors have full speed of ramping up and down during 1 h, in line with the capability of a PWR, e.g. 3–5% of the nominal power by minute. The model assumes that only half of the EU-28 reactors operate load- following, such as to reﬂect the regulation limitations in some countries and the system operator strategy to optimize the ﬂeet by using some reactors at baseload and some others load-following. The management of the ﬂexibility is done at the level of the entire nuclear ﬂeet with an equal distribution of the depreciation among ﬂexible reactors.
The model applies to EU-28 ﬁrst, where all capacity types, demands and grid interconnections are aggregated, and then thirteen models applies to each of (thirteen) countries with nuclear power in 2050. Models at country level integrates national constraints in terms of grid limit, speciﬁc demand proﬁles over the year and the technology mix projected in 2050.
3.3.Inputs and scenarios in the future European power markets
Installed generation capacities in 2050 anticipate changes in the generation mix, issued from the model PRIMES, which is an energy system model based on views of each EU country experts used by the EU institutions for roadmaps and policy decisions (EC, 2013).6
The European electrical utilities adjust their mix to adapt to in- creased electricity demand, to carbon constraints, to higher renewable rates and new trading capacities. Our inputs on the hourly demand in 2012 are extracted from the ENTSO-E website,7 and on the supply side, the ﬁgures on installed capacities are based on projections of the Eur- opean Commission with the model PRIMES (EC, 2013). These show that renewables represent 50% in the total power demand in 2050, out of which intermittent renewables (IRES) account for 31%. Nuclear gen- eration  shares  in  the  EU  ﬁnal  energy  demand  are  of  31%  in  2012 (128 GW) and of 23% in 2050 (122 GW).
3.3.1.Table reading
The column ‘Min Load’ in Table 2 is the minimum level of the de- mand over the year, and it draws expected results in terms of ﬂexibility needs. If its value is higher than the nuclear installed capacity (the column ‘NUC’), the demand is able to absorb the output generated by NPPs at their maximum capacity factor. Otherwise, nuclear generation is greater than the demand and the system should curtail or export the overgeneration (E3, 2014). The capability to export the surplus is framed in the indicator ‘Interconnection degree’.
3.3.2.Interconnections
The interconnection degree by region is deﬁned by the grid capacity over the electricity generation capacity. The model assumes increased EU interconnection grid from the current 34 GW–43 GW, which is higher than targets of the European Commission's Energy Union Package by 2020 (plus 10%; EC, 2015a), but lower than levels of the European Climate Foundation's ‘Roadmap to 2050’ (plus 150%; ECF, 2010). Some countries record low rates despite large grid capacity ex- tension, because the production capacity increases more than the grid extension, due to low IRES capacity factors (20% for on-shore wind and 14% for solar power).
3.3.3.Inputs on nuclear power reactors
The Pressurized Water Reactor (PWR) is the most common type of reactor of the European nuclear ﬂeet (80%). Currently, Europe is about to deploy the third generation of the PWR, the European Pressurised Reactor (EPR), with two ﬁrst of a kind EPRs under construction, in Finland and in France. Next, we will assess the economics and the op- eration of the EPR with ﬁnancial and technological characteristics shown in Table 3.
The Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) includes the cost induced by borrowing the capital, and represents the minimum return that the investor must earn on the expected asset base. The heavy in- vestment required by the nuclear project leads to levels of 9% for each WACC and the discount rate, which is relatively close to the private discount rate of 8% in OECD-NEA (2012b).
The present value of the total cost of building and operating the nuclear plant is used to compute the Levelised cost of electricity of the NPP (see formula in Appendix 1). Costs divided by energy production over the NPP lifetime represent the minimum price an investor should receive to cover all costs. The inputs are the expected overnight capital cost of EPR construction in 2050, the operation & maintenance (O&M) costs, and the fuel-cycle costs, and also important inﬂuencing para- meters are the expected energy generation, the duration of construc- tion, and the costs of ﬁnancing (D'haeseleer, 2013). Although the duration of building ﬁrst EPRs in Europe is currently exceeding ten years, it is assumed that by 2050 the standardization of reactors will beneﬁt directly from experience and learning spillovers and will reduce both the investment cost and the construction time.
4.Model results analysis
Results are ﬁrst analysed at the EU level, in aggregated terms (section 4.1), and then by region (section 4.2) and by stakeholder (section 4.3).
4.1.Eﬀects of intermittency on the nuclear power provision at the EU level
NPP cycling. The model's results in terms of cycling are compared to the reactor licence in order to assess if additional cycles are performed and if a certain fatigue would be induced. The publication of IAEA on load-following (2018) makes a comprehensive assessment of the fatigue which can be associated with ﬂexible operation of PWR technologies. It is stated that ﬂexible operation can have an impact on the core physics
Table 2
The main assumptions driving the ﬂexibility of nuclear plants in 2050.
Table 3
Economic characteristics of an EPR power plant of 1650 MW in 2050. Source: OECD-NEA (2015).
parameters of the NPP with relevant impacts on the thermal stress, which would induce fatigue, and on the reactivity of the reactor core, which will cause more and deeper movements of the control rods.
In our calculus, the Reactor design in Table 4 shows the number of yearly cycles obtained by dividing the number of cycles allowed by the licence by the number of the years of lifetime, e.g. 60. A ﬂexible reactor could  perform  cycles  with  depths  from  10%  to  60%,  aﬀecting  diﬀer- ently the reactor performance, as a function of the fatigue induced, be it mechanical or thermal (IAEA, 2018). Cycles of 10% amplitude (% of the rated power) are limited to 1667 (denoted C0), and cycles with deep- ness of 20%, 40% and 60% are denoted C1, C2, and C3 respectively.
Results show that during both the calibration year and the projec- tion  year  there  is  an  excessive  cycling  of  ﬂexible  NPPs  (row  Annual budget   of   cycles   is   compared   to   tow   Simulated   number   of   cycles). Requirements for load-following would be larger in 2012 than in 2050, partly  due  to  renewables  but  more  particularly  due  to  baseload  over- capacity in 2012 (see rows Simulated number of cycles by year). By 2050, trends are reversed, with more renewables and less installed baseload generators. Cycling reactors more often implies additional plant fatigue and shorter lifetime, reducing the annual transient budget with 24 days in 2012 and with 18 days in 2050. Prior to the expected lifetime of 60 years, if the reactor would behave in the same way each year as in the hypothetical scenario in 2050, this would leave an average NPP out of operation three years earlier. The deepness of cycles is diﬀerent by year (Fig. 3) as reactors perform fast and deep cycles in 2050 driven by more intermittency,  and  shorter  but  long  lasting  cycles  with  large  plateau
Table 4
Results of a NPPs cycling in 2012 and in 2050.
eﬀects in 2012, driven by baseload generators.
4.1.1.NPP load factors
Load-following leads to low load factors in 2012, due to lower output. Interestingly, operating inﬂexible NPP at steady state by 2050 is possible at low load factors only, e.g. 72% instead of 96% in 2012. That is, baseload does not necessarily imply high load factors, but means steady state operation. According to IAEA (2018), the baseload opera- tion of a generating unit refers to operation at steady full rated thermal power and full rated electrical output. So generating continuously be- comes impossible at full load, but at lower rates, i.e. at steady state.
Fig. 4 shows two diﬀerent operating baseload modes, in 2012 and in 2050, and it also compares two operating modes in 2050, load-fol- lowing versus baseload. It is shown that the load factor in 2012 in higher than in 2050, i.e. 90% versus 59%, due to more variability in 2050 and to more constraints for power variations. It should be noted also that baseload operation, deﬁned as full rated power operation, become a steady state operating mode, since the NPP runs at less than 100% of the nominal power; besides, some power variation is needed even in the case named Baseload, with however limited dynamics in time.
The comparison between Flexible and Inﬂexible operating modes shows that a ﬂexible NPP could locally supply more than if the NPP would operate baseload only, suggesting that from an economic per- spective a NPP could be viable in future power systems by only oper- ating ﬂexibly such as to increase the power output. If the NPP would operate only baseload, the operator would supply low output knowing that at critical points (hours 31 and 41 in Fig. 4), the NPP could not decrease the output as required by the system.In general, capital intensive technologies prove viable if their load
factors are higher than 90% such as to recover their high capital cost.
But besides volumes, proﬁts largely rely on power market prices.
4.1.2.NPP economics
Flexible NPP proﬁts are evaluated at two price levels to account for uncertainties of future power prices, one price calibrated against his- torical market average prices (the column ‘Market Price’), and another price obtained with the dispatching model, varying at each hour (the column ‘Model Price’ is the average of our results). It is assumed that by 2050, market prices decrease by 10% compared to 2012 levels, based  on EC (2013; 2015b) and EFC (2010): long-run prices would rise until 2030 due to high costs with decarbonisation, replacement of old gen- eration capacity, grid extension, storage and balancing capacity; but will decline by 2050, due to high shares of already mature renewables,technology eﬃciency and diversiﬁed technologies with profusion
Fig. 3. Operation of an average ﬂexible NPP over two days, model results in the EU.
eﬀects. This decreasing eﬀect by 2050 overtakes the cost increase of gas (+14%), coal (+33%) and carbon tax (100 €/t CO2) such as assumed    in the model in 2050, based on the model PRIMES used by the European Commission  for  policy  making  (EC,  2013).  Model  prices  are  much higher than the real market prices, since the model ignores equilibrium tensions and operators power on the market and local congestions which could make must-run operators selling the electricity under their marginal cost. Therefore the model results should be considered with caution.
Results show negative proﬁts in both the baseyear and the projec- tion year, when the output generated with ﬂexible NPP is evaluated at the actual market power price (see negative NPV in Table 5). A lower market price in 2050 engenders higher losses, despite higher load factor
than in 2012, meaning that a (higher) volume eﬀect is not compensated
by a (lower) price eﬀect. The NPV is deﬁnitely sensitive to the load factor, but non-linearly because the lifetime, the volume and prices are all interdependent. The situation would reverse if power prices were to be set at the model price level (76 €/MWh in 2050). By calibration it is obtained that the optimal price should be at least 55 €/MWh in order to cover the NPP capital cost.
The cost of generation (LCOE) improves in 2050 because it is not price dependent, and thus it highly depends on the volume, triggered by higher load factor. However, excessive cycling has an additional cost for plant upgrading to avoid early retirement. Results are here subject to perfect knowledge of the time when components need replacement and modernisation, following the regulator and operator description of the licence. In practice, it is particularly diﬃcult to estimate the cost of all components aﬀected. Cycling-related damage may not be im- mediately apparent and it can take up to seven years for an increase in the failure rate to become apparent after switching from baseload to load-following (Troy et al., 2010). Including costs and cycling un- certainty would negatively aﬀect proﬁts on one hand, but the salvage value of decommissioned components which could still be used, would increase the NPP value.
4.2.
Assessment of the economics of ﬂexible NPPs by region
This section depicts the fatigue of ﬂexible NPPs by region in 2050, and highlights the value of the load-following as the opportunity cost of not operating baseload. It compares therefore two scenarios: NPPs op- erating load-following (LF in Table 6) and NPP operating baseload (noted BL). For the cost-beneﬁt indicators, it should be noted that up- grading is not integrated within this section, to cope with the above uncertainty of the salvage value in case of NPP modernisation. It will be further on the regulator and on the investor to assess the ﬁnancial in- terest in upgrading a reactor which is close to its end-of-life. According to our calculations, upgrading would increase the cost from 1.2% to 7.5% depending on the region, in comparison with the case without fatigue (see a description of modernisation costs in IAEA, 2018).
4.2.1.NPP lifetime
Model results show that all regions record excessive cycling and shortened lifetime of ﬂexible reactors, except for the North market (Table 6, column ‘Reduced lifetime’). The highest requirements for ﬂexibility are in regions with high shares of nuclear and renewables (Central-Western Europe) and low interconnections (Western Europe
Fig. 4. Simulated baseload operation of inﬂexible NPPs in 2012 and in 2050 over two days.
Table 6
Results on the economics of ﬂexible nuclear power by region in 2050.
and South-West). Some regions need deep short cycles and some others exhaust the transient budget with light frequent cycles. In North and Central-East, this budget is well balanced between all cycle types; moreover, the number of cycles does not exceed the licensed design in most of countries, except for Poland, where signiﬁcant baseload capa- cities, mostly coal-ﬁred units, require more ﬂexibility.
4.2.2.Load factors
Load-following implies lower generation in all regions, except for the Central-Western Europe, where operating baseload is only possible at lower rates. This is the only region where operating ﬂexibly would allow NPPs to supply more volume and to increase thus the usage rate. The technology mix, as given by the model PRIMES which documents our assumptions on installed capacities (EC, 2013), implicitly requires load-following in this region due to large nuclear ﬂeet in 2050.
4.2.3.Levelised cost of electricity (LCOE)
The comparison between load-following and baseload shows an increase in costs due to volume compression eﬀect, except in the CWE region, due to higher load-factors. The lowest LCOE can be found in the Nordic countries (54 €/MWh) where the NPP load factor is rather high under load-following (94%). Here, most of the ﬂexibility is provided by hydro units, therefore the nuclear load-following requirements are low. By contrast, the highest levelised costs of electricity are recorded in Central-Western Europe (58.4 €/MWh), due to low load factors (84%). In other studies, LCOE are lower than our results (WNA, 2012), between 30 and 50$2005/MWh at 10% discount rate in 2011. They are higher in OECD-NEA (2015), between 80 and 120$2010/MWh at 10% discount rate, or for the PWR EPR in the United Kingdom, e.g. esti- mated at 115€2014/MWh due to higher investment costs (WNA, 2016b).
4.2.4.Net Present Value
The economics of NPPs largely depends on the technology mix of each power system which aﬀects the market power price and the vo- lume supplied with NPPs. The model assumes that the EU's objective to complete the internal power market is met by 2050, which means that power prices would converge among regional markets; however tem- porary deviations will occur within a wide range (ACER, 2014). The convergence remains thus partial by 2050 due to grid limitations, and this is why prices are region speciﬁc (the column ‘Model Price’  in Table 6).
At model price evaluation, ﬂexible reactors record proﬁts from ei- ther operating load-following or baseload, with however higher proﬁts from load-following in two regions (CWE and North). In Central-West, there is a volume-eﬀect, as NPPs can supply more energy and increase revenues. In North, there is a price-eﬀect; the downward variation in- creases the hourly power price as the technology is not marginal, and oﬀsets the decreased load factors. The substitution renewables-nuclear does not occur at equivalent ratios, 1 MWh for 1 MWh, and during downward nuclear operation, and other than renewable-based tech- nologies are integrated. In other words, when NPPs operate ﬂexibly,
other technologies, already operating at that time, could increase their production, such as biomass, CHP, gas-ﬁred and coal-ﬁred units.
For a NPP operator is less proﬁtable to invest in load-following in three regions (CEE, WEE, SWE), due to reduced load factors, with the largest loss recorded in South-West, due to low grid interconnectivity. Results should be interpreted with caution, since the market price obtained with the model integrates a high carbon tax (100 €/t CO2) and excludes some real market tensions, such as operators strategic beha- viour and local congestions as mentioned above. The dispatching model sets the price based on the marginal operation cost, and most of the time a thermal generator is the last technology called, therefore model
prices are higher than market prices and allows cost recovery.
The nuclear operator records high infra-marginal rents, which in- crease in general with the gas, oil and carbon prices. Yet, punctually, prices could be negative in this model, see for instance the example of the Netherlands recording 340 h with −100€/MWh in average in 2050. The model proves capable to capture signiﬁcant equilibrium tensions, such as saturated technical constraints, usually when the demand is low and operating plants are facing minimum load and ramping constraints (Fig. 5). Low demands and high power supply have historically en- hanced negative prices, and moreover the number of hours with ne- gative prices has been increasing every year, for instance in Germany from 33 h in 2012 to 146 in 2017, with however less extreme negative values indicating that market players have learned to deal with these situations (the lowest value in 2013 was −200 €/MWh against −83
€/MWh in 2017).8
4.3.NPP ﬂexibility assessment by stakeholder by region
Stakeholders involved in this analysis are the nuclear power op- erators, the consumers and the intermittent renewable energy operators on the one hand (see Table 7), and the system operator and the society from the perspective of CO2 pollution on the other hand (see Table 8). The value of ﬂexibility for the consumer's surplus variation is the price diﬀerential between load-following and baseload (column ‘Average Consumer Power Price’).9 The integration of variable energies is mea- sured by the diﬀerential of output suppression while load-following compared to baseload (column ‘IRES Curtailment’ in Table 7).
The NPP operators would record gains from operating ﬂexibly compared to a baseload case in two regions (Central-Western Europe and Northern Europe).
Central-Western Europe has high shares of nuclear power. A base- load steady state operation would be possible at only low load factors,
Fig. 5. Results of the model power prices in Netherlands over two days.
Table 7
Model results by region and by stakeholder in 2050, by operating mode.
Table 8
System eﬀects from load-following with NPP in 2050, model results.
due to oversized baseload infrastructure. Interestingly, providing nu- clear power upward makes prices decrease (−3.5 €/MWh in average over the year) because the nuclear power is large enough to punctually be the last technology setting the market price. The volume provided is also large and compensates the negative price-eﬀect.
Northern Europe power system is ﬂexible enough to integrate in- termittent renewables, since solar and wind curtailment is zero even during baseload operation. When NPPs operate ﬂexibly, other thermal technologies are integrated, which set the market price at a higher level, oﬀsetting the negative volume-eﬀect, e.g. lower NPP volume. An inertia mechanism due to technological and market constraints explains how the market selects more expensive technologies but which are al- ready operating rather than cheaper generators. See for instance CHP operation during winter time. In general, electrical grids with large hydro power can handle the integration of intermittent energies (Matek and Gawell, 2015). Nordic countries simulated have 27% of hydro power in the total generation in 2050 and wouldn't need additional ﬂexibility from nuclear plants, but note that the business case is at- tractive for a NPP to operate ﬂexibly.
In the other three regions, NPP operators record losses while supplying ﬂexibility.
Central-Eastern countries record a loss of 716 equivalent full hours in the load-following scenario. The renewables share is relatively low (10%), and the energy curtailment is 0. This means that the region
would need ﬂexible NPPs rather for higher grid stability due to the overall baseload dominated infrastructure, than for a better integration of intermittent renewables.
Western European countries have poor interconnections and North	0.9	0.9	18,832	7.8	6.8	1.0	medium shares of IRES (19%), setting a high pressure on ﬂexible NPPs
WEE	2.6	2.6	36,160	59.9	58.5	1.5	to operate load-following (less 700 full load hours), with therefore less revenues due to large volume reduction. The reactors' ﬂexible operation is however beneﬁcial to the system as a whole as it allows avoiding the curtailment of some 500 GWh of IRES in 2050. South-Western Europe has the least attractive economic environ- ment for ﬂexible NPP, due to large shares of IRES (34%) and to low interconnectivity (4%), reducing the output supplied with NPP. Both baseload and load-following present high volumes of curtailment, but lower during NPP load-following. The share of nuclear in the total generation mix is relatively low, which explains the low inﬂuence the nuclear has on the market average price (+1€/MWh).
Consumer surplus (Table 7) is the diﬀerential in the average market price between the two scenarios, with and without NPP ﬂexibility. The average market price is obtained as the total system cost divided by the ﬁnal demand. The consumer surplus is increasing in only one region (CWE), due to the large inﬂuence that nuclear power has on the market price; in the other regions, more expensive technologies oﬀset the po- sitive eﬀects from integrating intermittent renewables with close to zero marginal cost.
4.3.1.The system operator
The objective function of an individual investor (Proﬁt Maximisation) is diﬀerent from the power system interest modelled here (Total Cost Minimisation). The investor would operate baseload to maximise proﬁts, while under system cost minimisation problem, the
Table 9
Summary of eﬀects of load-following, by stakeholder, by region in 2050. NPP operator would be asked to operate ﬂexibly (Lykidi and Gourdel, 2015).
Under our system cost minimisation program, the system costs due to ﬂexible NPPs decrease in Central-West only. Here, NPP ﬂexibility allows a better integration of intermittent energies, such as wind and solar power, which substitute other more expensive technologies and make decrease the short-run system cost. In Central-East, the ﬂexible nuclear power allows a better integration of baseload thermal units with higher marginal costs, which increases the total system cost. In West and South-West, reducing the IRES curtailment is not enough to make decrease the system cost, as the substitution nuclear-renewables does not occur MWh for MWh. Consequently, more power from carbon- emitting units make increase the CO2 emissions.
Table 9 shows that a complete win-win situation is obtained in Central-Western Europe only, where all stakeholders record gains from NPP operating ﬂexibly. In other regions, there are winners and losers, and there is at least one winner, the IRES operator. Nuclear ﬂexibility is here a positive externality which beneﬁts to the system, and to the other operators than nuclear, including the ﬁnal consumer. Additional market provisions and regulatory measures could internalize a part of this so- cial value such as the nuclear operator to capture a share of the rent created with ﬂexible output. In these systems where nuclear load-fol- lowing does not allow operator to cover the lost load leading to the missing money issue, options such as capacity markets and contracts for diﬀerences (in the Nordic market, Kristiansen, 2004; and in United Kingdom, DECC, 2013) complement the energy-only wholesale market10, aiming to incentivise the investment in low carbon technol- ogies.11 Another cost-recovery option is to integrate ramping cost and depreciation into the marginal cost and the wholesale market prices, which could however downgrade the position of the NPP in the merit order curve with a further risk of lost load.
5.Conclusions
This study gives insights into the economic factors driving NPP operators to provide ﬂexible output. The economic concern is that the massive inﬂow of intermittent energies could gradually transform nu- clear power from a mainly baseload technology to a back-up capacity provider (OECD-NEA, 2012a, 2012b).
Mathematical optimisation shows that the economics of nuclear is system speciﬁc. By region, ﬂexible NPP operation is viable in Central- Western Europe, in the Nordic power system and in certain countries in
Appendix 1. Model equations
Eq. 1. The objective function = System costs minimisation:
Central and Eastern Europe. South-Western Europe has a high share of intermittent renewables, large needs for nuclear ﬂexibility and low interconnectivity, putting a too large pressure on reactors. Less attrac-tive systems are also those with large baseload capacities, where load-following needs are too high and the NPP cycling excessive, resulting in shorter technical reactor lifetime.
Ensuring ﬂexibility becomes an interesting case for NPP operators if they can inﬂuence the market price to record more revenues than from operating baseload. Among measures in support to low-carbon tech- nologies, carbon taxes could increase the spot market price and thus the nuclear infra-marginal rent. For the current market design, regulated contracts could be another option to hedge against the risk of low spot prices. Reserve provision could represent another revenue stream, but highly dependent on the regulation and the deepness of the market. In the USA, many of the early new nuclear plants proposed are located in areas where electricity markets are still regulated, based on a full cost- recovery policy (WNA, 2012).
The way this study can be generalized to other power systems de- pends heavily on system speciﬁcities, and on the regulator allowing NPPs to operate ﬂexibly, or not. This research identiﬁes the following mix combinations framing a good economic environment for ﬂexible NPPs:
-medium	interconnectivity	(< 50%)	+	ﬂexible	systems (hydro) + medium IRES share (15–30%) + no overgeneration;
-low interconnectivity (< 20%) + medium shares of IRES (15–30%) + large shares of nuclear capacity (> 60%);
-medium	interconnectivity	(< 50%)	+	no	over- generation + medium-high IRES share (> 15%).
New insights into the operation and the economics of nuclear power could be drawn by extending the study to new power markets, in de- veloping countries and emerging economies, and by expanding the research methodology to new nuclear technologies, such as small medium modular reactors (Locatelli et al., 2015). Fatigue costs need further estimations and non-linearity considerations, due to accumu- lated fatigue and cross-stress interaction eﬀects. In the future, technical aspects will inﬂuence the ﬂexibility provision and the investor decision to innovate such as the new reactor design to avoid operational ramping cost and depreciation.
The modernisation of the policy framework is essential in the con- text of a rapidly growing share of renewables with impacts on con- ventional generators. Timely consideration should be given to options for the EU 2030/2050 milestones, such as to ensure ﬂexible supply and suﬃcient capacity to meet demand. Unless power prices are relatively high in the future, conventional power plants might not be economic- ally viable, and market arrangements are necessary in complement to spot markets to prevent that renewables create barriers to baseload units.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the anonymous referees of the journal Progress in Nuclear Energy for their very constructive com- ments.
