<title>Consequence analysis for nuclear reactors, Yongbyon</title>
<author>Taewook Kang & Moosung Jae</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>Department of Nuclear Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2016.1255572</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2016.1255572</URL>
ABSTRACT
Since the Fukushima nuclear power plant accidents in 2011, there have been an increased pub- lic anxiety about the safety of nuclear power plants in Korea. The lack of safeguards and facility aging issues at the Yongbyon nuclear facilities have increased doubts. In this study, the conse- quence analysis for the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor in North Korea was performed. Var- ious accident scenarios including accidents at the interim spent fuel pool in the 5-MWe reactor have been developed and evaluated quantitatively. Since data on the design and safety system of nuclear facilities are currently insufficient, the release fractions were set by applying the alter- native source terms made for utilization in the analysis of a severe accident by integrating the results of studies of severe accidents occurred before. The calculation results show the early fatal- ity zero deaths and latent cancer fatality about only 13 deaths in Seoul. Thus, actual impacts of a radiological release will be psychological in terms of downwind perceptions and anxiety on the part of potentially exposed populations. Even considering the simultaneous accident occurrence in both 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor and 100-MWt light water reactor, the consequence analysis using the MACCS2 code shows no significant damage to people in South Korea.
KEYWORDS
Risk; reactor; Yongbyon; PRA; MACCS; release consequence
1.Introduction
After the occurrence of the Fukushima accident, ques- tions about the risk of nuclear facilities have been raised globally and various efforts to enhance the safety of nuclear facilities have been made such as the implemen- tation of design changes to reduce the risk of nuclear power plants. In the midst of these domestic/foreign situations, North Korea is assumed as continuously showing movements for re-operation of nuclear facil- ities after the declaration of re-operation of Yongbyon nuclear facilities (‘13.4.2). In addition, in the VIP state- ment (‘14.3.25) related to ‘the risk of accidents in North Korean Yongbyon nuclear facilities’ raised during the Netherlands Nuclear Security Summit, the issue of the safety of Yongbyon nuclear facilities came to the fore.
In South Korea, although studies for analysis of the current situation of the operation of North Korean nuclear facilities and measures to verify the current situation of the operation of North Korean nuclear facilities have been conducted, no quantitative anal- ysis of the risk  of  North  Korean nuclear  facilities has been conducted [1]. Therefore, a quantitative assessment should be made of the potential conse- quences within the Korean Peninsula of an accident and countermeasures to minimize the health consequences to the people of South Korea may need to be prepared. The purpose of the present study  is  to  assess the environmental impact of the release of radioac- tive materials from North Korean nuclear facilities in order to assess the magnitude of radiological health
consequences in South Korea. Through the foregoing, the present study may contribute to the establishment of policies to respond to North Korean nuclear activities and measures to minimize radiological health effects as well as the establishment of countermeasures against potential health effects from other radiological events, such as nuclear terrorist activities other than North Korean nuclear facilities.
2.Surveys on nuclear facilities of North Korea
Thus far, a total of 13 nuclear facilities including ura- nium refining facilities and nuclear fuel processing facilities have been identified as being in operation in Yongbyon, North Korea. In the present study, the scale of damage that may be caused in case where accidents have occurred in the 13 nuclear facilities of which the existence has been identified was assessed. Since data on the design and safety system of North Korean nuclear facilities are currently insufficient, the scale of dam- age that may be caused when an accident has occurred was qualitatively assessed first based on the records of accidents in various domestic/foreign nuclear facilities designed for the same purpose [2,3].
Based on the results of the evaluation, nuclear facil- ities other than reactors are considered to cause only accidents involving leaks or ruptures involving small releases of radioactive materials with only local con- sequences. However, the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor that are currently in operation has been eval-uated to potentially have significant radiological health effects to not only nearby areas but also even to major cities in South Korea including Seoul if the nuclear materials in the reactor cores are discharged into the
atmosphere. The 100-MWt light water reactors  under construction now can also cause accidents that can induce wide area damage when they have been com- pleted [1]. However, the risk of the 100-MWt light water reactors cannot be reasonably assessed because they have not yet been completed and the time of operation cannot be easily predicted. Therefore, in the present study, the potential health effects when an accident has occurred in a 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor were quantitatively assessed.
3.Consequence assessment methodology
To assess the effects of accidents in Yongbyon nuclear facilities, the MACCS2 code, which is a code used to assess the dispersion of radioactive materials released from a nuclear power plant and the potential asso-  ciated consequences to the exposed population, was used. The input factors of MACCS2 code were deter- mined mainly referring to the basic data provided by the USNRC (United States Nuclear Regulatory Com- mission) and the input factors in the SOARCA (State- of-the-Art Reactor Consequence Analyses) report pre- pared in 2007 on Surry Nuclear Power Plant and Peach- bottom Nuclear Power Plant for assessment of risks in the surroundings of the nuclear power plants [4].
3.1.Flows of radioactive clouds
The basic differential equation of the MACCS2 code simulates Gaussian radioactive clouds and the move- ments, diffusion, and deposition of radioactive clouds. For Gaussian radioactive clouds, the value of the diffu- sion equation (1) below should be calculated.
@1
where χ is the radiation density ( Ci/m3 sec ); t is the elapsed time after release (s); x is the distance in the wind direction (m); y is the distance in the horizon- tal (cross-wind) direction (m); z is the distance in the vertical direction (m); and Kx,y,z is the eddy coefficient. If the value of the diffusion Equation (1) is calculated,
a Gaussian radioactive cloud model equation as shown by Equation (2) can be obtained.
@2
where σ (x) is the atmospheric dispersion factor in the
wind direction (m); σ (y) is the atmospheric dispersion
Table . Tadmor-Gur dispersion coeﬃcients.
factor horizontal to the wind direction (m); σ (z) is the atmospheric dispersion factor vertical to the wind direction (m); Q is the source strength (Bq); u¯ : is the average wind speed at effective stack height (m/s); h is the effective stack height, including rise of the hot plume near the source (m).
In NUREG/CR-7161, the USNRC presented new atmospheric dispersion factors derived through addi- tional experiments [5]. The SOARCA conducted in 2007 to assess the risks of the surroundings of Surry Nuclear Power Plant and Peach-bottom Nuclear Power Plant also used the atmospheric dispersion factor data presented in NUREG/CR-7161 as basic data values. The atmospheric dispersion factors used in the present study are as shown in Table 1 and the dispersion param- eters are calculated by Equation (3).
@3
where σyi is the crosswind dispersion parameter (m);
σzi is the vertical dispersion parameter (m); ai is the linear coefficient for crosswind dispersion (m); ci is the linear coefficient for vertical dispersion (m); x is the downwind distance (m); bi is the exponential parame- ter for crosswind dispersion (dimensionless); di is the exponential parameter for vertical dispersion (dimen- sionless).
3.2.Wet and dry deposition
Wet and dry depositions are phenomena for nuclides in moving radioactive clouds to be deposited on the ground due to gravity and rains. As the degree of depo- sition increases, the amount of radioactive substances being deposited increases, leading to increases in long- term exposure doses. However, increases in the amount of deposited radioactive substances reduce the density of radioactive materials in radioactive clouds so that the exposure doses of regions far away from the radi-ation source may rather decrease. Decreases in the den-deposited nuclear substances due to wet and dry depo-
sitions are as shown by Equations (4) and (5), respec- tively.
@4
Table . Wet/dry deposition coeﬃcients in NUREC/CR-
where OQ is the amount of wet deposited radioactive substances (Bq); a  is the wet deposition coefficient 1; b is the wet deposition coefficient 2; I is the amount of rainfall (mm).
@5
where ω is the dry deposition rate (Bq/m2); vd is the dry deposition velocity (m/s).
For the factors used for wet and dry depositions, the values presented in reference were used and the values are as shown in Table 2 [5].
3.3.Early and late effect assessment
The damage suffered by victims through radioactive clouds is divided into early damage that causes the  effects of exposure in short periods of time and late damage that causes the effects over long periods of time. To assess these two exposure pathways separately, the MACCS2 code calculates radiation damage separately for early one and late one.
In the early health impact risk model of the MACCS2 code, individuals’ risks due to exposure are as shown by Equation (6) [6].
@6
where D is the biological effective dose to the target organ; D50 is the dose that may cause damage to the target organ or death of a half of the exposed popula- tion; β is the shape parameter, a value that is affected by the shape of an object.
Input factors important in SOARCA are presented in Table 3.
Linear-secondary risk-assessment  models  are  used for assessment of cancer death risks. In linear- secondary risk-assessment models, risks increase in proportion to the dose until the dose increases to the extent that it necrotizes individual cells and decrease when the dose has become larger. In linear-secondary risk-assessment models, cancer risks are calculated as
Table . Early fatality input data.
shown by the following equation [6]:
@7
where Ri  is the cancer-causing risk of a certain organ i; Di is the dose toa certain organ i; Dth is the cancer- causing threshold dose to a certain organ i.
3.4.Topography and weather
The input file site.inp consists of data on topography. Characteristics related to populations and topography are simulated by entering 16 bearings and values cor- responding to the area within the distance set by the user into the input data site.inp. As population data, the population distribution data as of August 2014 recently provided by the Ministry of Public Administration and Security were used in the case of South Korea and the 2008 population distribution data were used in the case of North Korea due to the lack of data.
In the case of meteo.inp which is a weather input file, weather conditions are made into data and entered. Wind directions, rainfall, atmospheric stability, and wind velocity are entered as numbers. In the present study, to evaluate damage that may be caused to the Korean peninsula when an accident has occurred in Yongbyon nuclear facilities, constant weather condi- tions were simulated conservatively as input data in which winds blew from Yongbyon to Seoul. For the weather conditions, the 2008 annual average climatic
data for the Korean Peninsula were applied and the average wind speed 4 m/s and atmospheric stability ‘grade C’ were utilized.
4.Assessment of potential consequences
As a base-case in the present study, the effects of radiation from an accident in the 5-MWe graphite- moderated reactor on the surrounding areas and the Korean Peninsula were evaluated. An accident scenario was considered assuming that a worst accident would occur due to a natural disaster or terrorism from the outside and radioactive substances would be released from reactor cores and spent fuel storage pools simul- taneously and major assumptions are as follows. In this study, input data for various important factors were mainly quoted from the data in NUREG/CR-7009 which is an SOARCA assessment report [5].
4.1.Major assumptions
The 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor is equipped with a magnox graphite-moderated reactor design similar to the Windscale Nuclear
Table . Radioactive inﬂuences for  MWe graphite moderated reactor.
Power Plant in the UK and the reactor core nuclear material inventory data for the  rele-  vant graphite-moderated reactor were used as a scale [7].
The release fractions were set by applying the alter- native source terms made for utilization in the analysis of a severe accident by integrating the results of studies of severe accidents occurred, thus that began with the TMI nuclear power plant acci- dent.
The plume segment duration time, a value of 86,400 s was assumed in this study and in order to consider the uncertainty, this maximum time is conservatively used in the MACCS2 code.
For maintainability, emergency response measures after accident were not considered.
As for exposure doses, exposure doses for the first one year and five years after accident were evalu- ated as base values.
It was assumed that the accident in the graphite- moderated reactor occurred when three years had passed after beginning the operation.
For the weather conditions, the annual average climatic data in the year of 2008 for the Korean Peninsula (the average wind speed, 4 m/s and atmospheric stability, ‘grade C’) were used.
4.2.Assessment of risks when an accident has occurred in the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor
The results of assessment of risks in major cities in the Korean Peninsula based on the MACCS2 code are set forth in Table 4 and Figure 1. Table 4 shows collective
doses and individual doses for one year and five years after the occurrence of the accident and the number of deaths and mortality rates occurred for five years. In Figure 1, the results of evaluation of risks set forth in Table 4 were visually schematized so that the scales of damage in the entire area of the Korean Peninsula can be seen.
According to the results of evaluation of the effects of radioactivity by region in the Korean Peninsula, damage due to exposure was larger in areas closer to the region where the accident occurred and in regions located in the leeward side.
Cities in South Korea were shown to have very light casualties due to radioactivity because these cities are far away from the reactors being evaluated. Regions with the largest damage were the northern part of Gyeonggi-do and Seoul. In particular, in the case of Seoul which is densely populated, the evaluation indi- cated that, when an accident has occurred in the 5- MWe graphite-moderated reactor, the individual dose for one year and for five years would be 9.6 × 10−3 mSv and 2.97 × 10−2 mSv, respectively, and the death ratio would be 0.000132% for five years. Since the ratio of deaths occurred for five years after the occurrence of the Chernobyl accident was 0.43%, the ratio of deaths that may occur in Seoul when an accident has occurred in the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor is approx- imately 0.03% of that of the Chernobyl accident and the individual dose for one year is a value correspond- ing to approximately 0.96% of the limit of individual dose per year recommended in ICRP (International Commission on Radiological Protection) which is 1 mSv [8–10]. Since this is much lower than the dose
Figure . Radioactive damage inﬂuences for the  MWe graphite moderated reactor.
of natural background radiation amounting to 2.4 mSv per year, damage to Seoul by an accident in the 5- MWe graphite-moderated reactor was quite insignifi- cant. These results were obtained from the analysis with the released radioactive materials from the severe acci- dents in the nuclear facility. Therefore, it was expected that the death ratios would increase slightly when the background doses combined accumulatively. However, it turns out that the difference between the accident source terms and those combined with backgrounds is shown negligible for the number of deaths. The reason for these results is that the absolute inventory of nuclear materials of the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor is relatively small.
5.Sensitivity analysis
In the present study, to assess the risks when an accident has occurred in Yongbyon nuclear facilities, input fac- tors were prepared based on data in NUREG/CR-7009 which is an SOARCA assessment report [5]. In this sec- tion, factors that have large effects on the results were identified through analyses of the sensitivity of these input factors and the sensitivity of the results to the trends of changes in the factors were analyzed through the following procedures.
5.1.Analysis of sensitivity to the accident scenario
Although  it  is  too  early  to   discuss   the   risk   of the 100-MWt experimental light water reactor in Yongbyon because this reactor is not in operation now, if the operation of this reactor begins and an accident occurs, the scale of damage is expected to be much  larger because of its output and reactor core inven- tory much larger compared to the 5-MWe graphite- moderated reactor. In addition, because this 100-MWt
experimental light water reactor is located very close to the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor, if external fac- tors such as natural disasters act, the two nuclear facili- ties may cause accidents simultaneously. Therefore, in the present analysis, sensitivity to radiation risks was calculated for an accident in the 100-MWt experimental light water reactor and for simultaneous accidents in the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor and the 100-MWt experimental light water reactor.
The reactor core inventory of the relevant nuclear facilities was calculated through the inventory of the reactor core inventory of Hanaro Nuclear Power Plant for research in Daejeon and the same assumptions as those used for the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reac- tors were applied to the accident scenarios. That is,  for the 5-MWe reactor core inventory, the Windscale Nuclear Power Plant was taken as the reference, while Hanaro Nuclear Power Plant was utilized as the ref- erence for 100-MWt light water research reactor. The results of analysis of sensitivity to the accident scenar- ios are shown in Figure 2.
According to the results of the assessment, the scale of damage that may be caused when an accident has occurred in the 100-MWt light water reactor was esti- mated to be approximately 10 times compared to the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor. This is because the 100-MWt experimental light water reactor has much larger output and nuclear material inventory in the reactor core compared to the 5-MWe graphite- moderated reactor. If the two nuclear power plants cause accidents simultaneously, the scale of damage should be approximately 10% larger than the damage due to an accident in the 100-MWt experimental light water reactor. However, in the case of the scenario for simultaneous accidents, the annual individual dose of a Seoul resident was calculated to be 0.153 mSv which is much lower than the annual dose limit presented in ICRP-103.
Figure . Sensitivity analysis results for various accident scenarios.
5.2.Analysis of sensitivity according to climatic conditions
For climatic conditions, the 2008 annual average cli- matic data for the Korean Peninsula were applied and average wind speed 4 m/s into a direction and atmo- spheric stability ‘grade C’ were applied. However, since climatic conditions show large variations compared to annual average values in some cases, additional analyses should be conducted later. In the present study, sensi- tivity analyses were conducted by applying the monthly average climatic data for the Korean Peninsula as shown in Table 5. The applied climatic data and the results of the sensitivity analyses are shown in Figure 3.
According to the results of analyses, in all regions, doses showed a tendency to increase a little when wind velocity decreased. This is because when veloc- ity decreases, the wind velocity part of the denominator of the Gaussian radioactive cloud model’s radioactivity concentration calculation equation decreases leading to increases in the entire radioactivity concentration.
On the other hand, in July and August, a ten- dency contrary to the above tendency appears in cities in North Korea and South Korea regions. This is a  phenomenon caused by relatively very high average
rainfall. When it rains, radioactive substances are deposited quickly due to wet deposition in addition  to dry deposition while the concentration of radioac- tive clouds decreases in proportion to the deposition. Therefore, if it rains, while high doses will appear in Gaecheon and Pyeongyang that are close to Yongbyon due to massive wet deposition, doses will be reduced in cities in the South Korea regions because these cities will be affected by radioactive clouds at reduced concentra- tions after the deposition of large amounts of radioac- tive materials.
5.3.Analysis of sensitivity according to exposure time
Exposure time affects damage by long-term expo- sure to radioactive substances. When the base-case was assessed, an exposure time of five years was selected under the judgment that post-accident mea- sures against long-term exposure would be taken latest within five years. However, since emergency countermeasures against North Korean nuclear facil- ity accidents had not been accurately established, analysis of long-term exposure exceeding five years was
Table . Monthly average climatic data for the Korean Peninsula.
Figure . Sensitivity analysis results for various climate conditions.
conducted and the results of the analysis are shown in Figure 4.
According to the results of assessment, the progress of dose increases according to exposure time was show- ing similar tendencies regardless of regions because  as the exposure time increases, the increment  of  doses decreases since nuclides that are absorbed by  human bodies or cause long-term exposure after being deposited decay gradually. It was identified that even if doses have been accumulated for 50 years at the max- imum, individual doses in Seoul would be approxi- mately 0.14 mSv which is much smaller than the annual dose limit recommended by the ICRP.
5.4.Analysis of sensitivity according to release fractions
Although the alternative radiation source term uti- lized in assessment of a severe accident, like station blackout in nuclear power plants, was designated as a release fraction in the present study, according to the results of two-stage PRA analyses of domestic pres- surized water reactors, there were cases where higher release fractions were shown in some accident scenarios
[11]. Therefore, in this section, sensitivity levels accord- ing to the release fractions of I-131 and Cs-137 were analyzed assuming that the release fractions of radioac- tive substances could reach up to 100% of the inventory in the reactor core and the results shown in Figures 5 and 6, respectively, were obtained through the analy- ses. The results show that individual dose for both I- 131 and Cs-137 linearly increased with the increase of release fraction. Based on the individual dose increasing trend in accordance with the increase of release frac- tion, it was evaluated that the amount of released Cs- 137 has a large effect on the damage scale. Therefore, a detailed analysis is required for accident scenarios that could lead to an excessive release of Cs-137 compared to the radiation source terms used in this study.
5.5.Analysis of sensitivity according to nuclear power plant operation time
Although only the release of nuclear materials in reac- tor cores is considered in the case of design basis acci- dents, for conservative assessment, cases where nuclear materials are simultaneously released from the reactor core and the spent fuel storage pool were selected as a
Figure . Sensitivity analysis results for various exposure times.
severe accident scenario. Since spent fuels in the reac- tor core are moved to and stored in the spent fuel stor- age pool during planned preventive maintenance peri- ods of reactors, the amount of nuclear materials in the spent fuel storage pool increases as reactor operation time increases.
Figure . Sensitivity analysis results for various operation times.
In the present study, an assumption that the Yong- byon reactor undergoes planned preventive mainte- nance at intervals of 1.5 years and 1/3 of the reactor core inventory is stored in the spent fuel storage pool was applied. It was assumed that the reactor was oper- ated maintaining the output and the degree of burnup necessary to recover the previous inventory during the time between the planned preventive maintenance and the next maintenance time. In this case, the amount of nuclear materials in the spent fuel storage pool and the reactor core is as shown by Equation (8).
@8
where A is the total amount of nuclear materials;  A0  is the reactor core inventory at the time of planned pre- ventive maintenance; λ is the decay constants of Cs-137 and I-131.
Five years and 10 years were selected as operation times in addition to three years applied to the base-case and the results of assessment are shown in Figure 7.
It can be seen that if the operation time of the 5- MWe graphite-moderated reactor reaches 10 years, the scale of damage when an accident has occurred will be two times of that when an accident has occurred in case where the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor has been operated for three years because the sum of nuclear material inventories in the spent fuel storage pool and the reactor core when the reactor has been operated for 10 years should be two times compared to that when the reactor has been operated for three years.
In this case, the individual dose occurring in Seoul will be 3.86 × 10−3 mSv. Although much larger com- pared to the accident scenario selected as a base-case, this is still smaller than the annual dose limit recom- mended by ICRP-103. Given the increasing tendency of doses, it is predicted that even if the reactor is continu- ously operated for more than 10 years, the scale of dam- age in South Korea regions including Seoul will still be insignificant. Therefore, the assessment indicates that even if an accident occurs in the graphite-moderated
reactor that has been operated fora long time, the scale of damage to South Korean regions will not reach a seri- ous level.
6.Conclusions
As concern about North Korean movement to re- operate its nuclear facilities and commence the con- struction of a new reactor has been increasing, domes- tic/foreign attention has been concentrated on dam- age due to the occurrence of an accident in a nuclear power plant in operation. In particular, in the case of North Korean nuclear facilities, the possibility of occur- rence of accidents that can cause large-scale damage exists because of the insufficient technical level and the unstable international relations of North Korea. In the present study, based on the review of the present sit- uation of operation of North Korean nuclear facilities and the present situation of nuclear facilities in which large-scale accidents may occur, the risk of radioactiv- ity damage to major cities, in particular, regions close to Seoul, when the worst possible accident has occurred in the relevant nuclear facilities was quantitatively assessed through important input data provided by the SOARCA Program of the USNRC as well as the MACCS2 code which is a Level 3 PRA implementation program.
Since the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor was assessed as being capable of causing the largest dam- age to the Korean Peninsula when an accident has occurred among all nuclear power-related facilities cur- rently existing in the Yongbyon region, in the present study, the scales of radiation damage were calculated for diverse scenarios that can cause the worst damage including simultaneous accidents in the spent fuel stor- age pool and the reactor core for the relevant nuclear facilities.
In the present study, through the assessment, the annual dose of an individual in the Gaecheon region in North Korea which is located nearest to Yongbyon when an accident has occurred in the 5-MWe graphite- moderated reactor was identified as 0.21 mSv and that in Seoul was identified as 9.6 × 10−3 mSv. The assess- ment indicated that when an accident has occurred, there should be no early death due to exposure and nine and 13 cancer deaths after the accident might occur in Gaecheon and Seoul, respectively. Since ICRP-103 rec- ommends an annual dose limit for an individual as 1 mSv, the doses in major cities in the Korean Peninsula including Gaecheon and Seoul are assumed to be much smaller than the annual dose limit. In particular, the scales of damage to South Korean regions were identi- fied to be not only smaller than the recommended dose of ICRP-103 but also quite insignificant when compared to exposure due to the Chernobyl accident and expo- sure due to natural radiation [12]. While the death ratio for five years after the occurrence of the Chernobyl acci- dent was 0.4%, the death ratio for five years in Seoul
after an accident in the 5-MWe graphite-moderated reactor was estimated to be 0.000132% which is only 1/3000 compared to the Chernobyl accident. In addi- tion, while the annual individual exposure dose is 2.4 mSv, the annual individual exposure dose in Seoul after the accident was estimated to be 0.0096 mSv which is only approximately 1/250 of the foregoing.
Sensitivity analyses were conducted for variables that seemed to have important effects on assessment results and the results indicated that the operation time of nuclear power plants and the release fractions of radioactive substances would have sensitive effects on the scales of damage to surroundings. Cs-137 was iden- tified asa nuclide that has the largest effect on the scale of radiation damage, through the analysis. In regions far away from Yongbyon nuclear facilities, the effects of weather conditions such as wind directions, wind velocity, and rainfall on the scale of damage were also shown to be large and, in particular, dose variations due to rainfalls were shown to be very large. However, even if the worst possible scenarios were considered, the scale of damage was shown to be insignificant in South Korean regions including Seoul to the extent that emer- gency countermeasures would not be necessary after the accident.
Since information on North Korean nuclear facil- ities was insufficient, in the present study, conserva- tive assumptions were applied to accident scenarios and important factors such as release fractions. To derive more accurate assessment results, reliable data on North Korean nuclear facilities’ systems and safety designs should be collected and Level 1 PRA analysis should be conducted to understand important accident scenarios and vulnerable systems. In addition, further studies are necessary to reduce the uncertainty of the amount of radioactive substances releases to the outside of containment buildings and the frequency of releases through Level 2 PRA analyses.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Korea Institute of Nuclear Nonproliferation and Control (KINAC) and partly supported by the Nuclear Safety Research Center through the Korea Radiation Safety Foundation, granted financial resources from the Nuclear Safety and Security Commission [number 1305008].
