<title>Safety assessment for the ultimate heat sink (UHS) system with non-injection concept in nuclear power plants (NPPs)</title>
<author>Yun Il Kim & Tae Ho Woo</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety,  Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon , Republic of Korea; bDepartment of Mechanical and Control Engineering, The Cyber University of Korea,  Bukchon-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul , Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2016.1204255</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2016.1204255</URL>
ABSTRACT
Following the Fukushima accident, it is proposed to find a better safety system, which has a pool- type cooling system without coolant injections. Since the conventional piping-based injection systems have failed in treating the three major severe accidents, the artificial pool could be con- structed to cover the failed reactor core systems in which the pool-like structure is constructed. Regarding this study, there were some previous studies about the ultimate heat sink (UHS). In this study, the system dynamics (SD) modeling is performed in the case of Fukushima Unit 1 accident. The basic events are obtained by the Boolean values as 0 and 1. The quantifications are obtained by the SD algorithm incorporated with the Vensim software. In the simulations work, there is a plateau region between the 25th and 45th years in the interested period. The nonlinear algorithm is applied for the UHS analysis which was not installed for the commercial use yet.
KEYWORDS
Fukushima accident; ultimate heat sink (UHS); system dynamics (SD); Vensim; nuclear power plants
1.Introduction
It is proposed to make a modified safety system in the nuclear power plants (NPPs). In this paper, the non- injected safety system is introduced where the pip-  ing failure could be avoided. The conventional piping- based injection systems have failed in treating the three major severe accidents. For the emergency situation, the newly designed artificial pool could be constructed to submerge the broken reactor core where the swimming pool-shaped structure surrounds. Although the piping- based coolant system is operating well in the normal condition, it is working in trouble for the emergency situation. The reliability of piping is a very important matter. If the piping is broken, it is impossible to con- tinue the flowing of the coolant. Until now, the capa- bility of emergency coolant injection has been one of major tasks for the severe accident research. By the way, it is necessary to seek for a much more advanced safety system which can take the cooling actions in the state of the coolant piping failure.
By the historical review, there are three severe acci- dents during the last half century. Unfortunately, the safety system in the plants had failed for the coolant injections in the past melting accidents. Table 1 shows the list of the failed past severe accidents of safety injection systems. Although the essential reasons of the past three major accidents of TMI, Chernobyl, and Fukushima are operators’ mistakes in pressure oper- ated relief valve (PORV) and emergency core cooling system (ECCS) operations, operator mistake incorpo- rated with system defect, and natural disaster-induced
management failures, respectively, the final conse- quences are considered as the coolant injection system failures. Therefore, it is needed to make the wise idea for the essential residual heat removal system in which the practical and realistic functions should be provided with the current technologies. In this work, the artificial pool surrounding the failed reactor buildings is con- sidered. So, the compartment surrounding the reactor building would be constructed after the occurrence of a severe accident. The construction of the compartment is a technological matter where the concreted parts are assembled in the position of the surrounding places. The works or facilities to make the structures could be irradiated by the hazardous radiations. In this study, the safety assessment is performed for the heat removal as the ultimate heat sink (UHS) using the pool-type cooling system. So, the structure is assumed to be constructed. In fact, it is possible to make the structure in a short period. The radiation could be endurable if robotics is used for the constructions, in which there are a wide variety of robotics.
In the operation of NPPs, the heat cooling is impor- tant in the hot full power which is the ability in normal operations. In this state, the piping systems of the plant should be in a good condition. Therefore, the pilot oper- ated safety relief valve (POSRV) or reactor coolant gas vent system (RCGVS) can be used for depressurizing the primary system, and the turbine-driven auxiliary feedwater pump can make the long-term heat removal in the primary system [1–3]. If there is an accident of the coolant flowing, it is needed to substitute with the heat
Table1. History of safety systems performance in severe accidents.
removal systems. So, in this work, the new heat removal system is designed without several coolant injections. In addition, the refueling work could be in a dangerous situation. The residual heat should be removed contin- uously up to the task termination time. If the cooling of residual heat is failed by the several safety injection sys- tems, the coolant injection needs to be changed to the other system. So, the non-injection concept could be a wise way to control the heat removal.
There are some problems to study in the heat removal of the current injection-based system. First of all, the containment stability is achieved for the core cooling capability in the  full  power operations, that is, in normal operations. In addition, for the refueling state, the stability of the containment should be main- tained. However, the emergency situation could bring the undesirable states like the steam explosion in the Fukushima nuclear accident when the containment and the safety injection systems are collapsed. The safety functions of the several safety systems which are used for multiple barriers are not effective any more. Basi- cally, the emergency coolant is injected by the piping systems in the conventional NPPs. So, the piping injec- tion systems have difficulties in the unexpected scenar- ios. If one can change the concept of injection, the prob- lem could be solved easily and simply. Conventional safety system is not effective as it is designed. That is to say, the designed accident scenarios are useless in the NPPs which are very complicated structures. For example, in the Fukushima case, the earthquake did not affect the plant. However, the indirect and secondary impacts such as Tsunami and human management fail- ures produced the severest nuclear disaster. If one chose the multiple control algorithm like the nonlinear com- plex logic system, the indirect and secondary impact could be controlled. In addition, the forced heat defus- ing strategy can block the fast and uncontrollable dam- age expansion in the very early stage. In fact, the nuclear reactions in nuclear system could be out of control by the human cognitions in the emergency situations con- sidering reaction transient time, temperature, pressure, and so on. If the pump is attached in this system, the cir- culation of coolant can increase the forced convections. There are some previous studies about the UHS. Proˇsek  and  Volkanovski  studied  some  new  kinds  of systems such as the turbine-driven auxiliary feedwater pump (TD-AFW), the portable water injection pump and the batteries [4]. Takamatsu and Hub showed the reactor cavity cooling system (RCCS) design which
is performed as the ex-reactor pressure vessel (RPV) region and a cooling region having heat transfer area to ambient air assumed at 40 °C [5]. In addition, Shih et al. worked that the consequences of an uncovered core and core melt can be avoided by adopting the proper reac- tor pressure vessel (RPV) depressurization and con- tainment venting strategy [6]. Section 2 explains the method of the study. Section 3 describes results of the study. There are some conclusions in Section 4.
2.Method
2.1.System dynamics (SD)
For the mathematical modeling of the study, the sys- tem dynamics (SD) method is used which was created by Dr Jay W. Forrester in MIT around 1960s. SD is a computer-based algorithm where the complex systems are focused especially by the feedback-based quantifi- cation. The political problems are the nonlinear mat- ters to solve by the SD and the other social human-  ity topics are major tasks to make the modeling [7,8]. Furthermore, the scientific and engineering problems have been modeled for the nonlinear problem like the industrial safety, environmental uncertainty, and many more simulation studies. The particular characteristics of the SD are performed by the feedback-based system. The causal loop is described for the event connectiv- ity in which the causes and results are connected by nonlinear trends. That is, the results can effect on the cause. For example, in the problem of the nuclear relia- bility, it is possible to make the analyses by the real-time quantification, which is different from the conventional safety review by a periodic manner. The general differ- ential equation could be solved by the SD algorithm and the variable quantity can be described by the designed conditions in the physical problems. In the ecological case of the population situation, the input data of the population could be described by the real-time varia- tion, because the event quantifications are done by the feedback-based analysis. So, there are some specialized characteristics in SD as follows [8]:
Levels: The event values are accumulated in the interested stages, which are regarded as Stocks.
Rates: This shows the event flows in which the sce- narios are constructed by the designed modeling. Feedback: Event can flow forward and backward. In the real world, the event flows in the forward
Figure 1. Simpliﬁed conﬁguration of nuclear power plant in nor- mal operations.
Figure2. Simpliﬁed conﬁguration of nuclear power plant by artiﬁcial pool compartment.
direction. It is impossible to go back to the past. In the SD simulation, the analysis could be made by the changing of the past event.
Furthermore, the applications of the SD modeling are effective in the nonlinear complex algorithm which happens in the very complicated systems like the NPPs. The direct and indirect causes of an event could be  described in the modeling.
Figure3. Pouring of coolants into reactor systems with pool compartment.
Figure4. I-A algorithm by statistical distribution: (a) normal dis- tribution []; (b) event-fault tree quantiﬁcation algorithm.
high-temperature gas-cooled reactor, because the com- mercial operations are very limited. The safety margin- based modeling was done for the non-operations event in the NPPs.
In Figure 4(a), there is the Impact-Affordability (I-A) algorithm for the safety margin as the difference of two distributions [9], which is used for the deficient opera- tional data case. In addition, there is the event-fault tree quantification algorithm in Figure 4(b). In this study, the SD is applied for the modeling which is given in Figure 5. The quantification of the modeling is shown
2.2.Modeling
In the modeling, Figure 1 shows the NPP which is oper- ating in normal operations. After the severe accident like the Fukushima case, the containment and reactors are failed. The compartment for artificial pool is imag- ined in this paper which is in Figure 2. Then, the pour- ing of coolant is performed and the damaged reactor and its related facilities including pressure vessel and pressurizer are submerged (Figure 3). So, the reliability of the new construction of the artificial pool is needed to be analyzed by the systematical review. There are no operational data in the safety analysis for the imaginary event case like the artificial pool constitution in this paper. Previously, there were some studies in the case of
Figure5. System dynamics (SD) algorithm: (a) SD distribution;
(b) SD quantiﬁcation analysis with feedback.
using the Vensim code system. In Figure 5(a), random numbers are generated between 0.0 and 1.0. If the ran- dom number is lower than A, it is 0. Otherwise, it is
1. Figure 5(b) shows the feedback event flow using SD. The SD method is utilized for the nonlinear complex algorithm in the quantification which is basically dif- ferent from the conventional probability-based analy- sis in which the Monte–Carlo random sampling is gen- erated for each event value. The backward arrow line shows the feedback algorithm of the event flow, which is the particular characteristics of the SD. The complex algorithm using feedback system modeling can describe the Fukushima nuclear accident where the direct cause of the earthquake produced the indirect and secondary causes such as Tsunami and human management fail- ures. Although the direct cause did not damage the plant, the secondary cause made the historic nuclear disaster. Therefore, the SD could be a wise tool for the analysis in the complex events which happens in com- plicated structures like the NPPs. The plus (+) sign is the event value summation.
There  was  the  reliability  study  where  the impact
and affordability relationship are studied in the case  of none or deficient  operational  data  system  like  the gas-cooled reactor, because the system is not commercialized yet. In this work, the Fukushima case
is modeled incorporated with the proposed post- accident treatment which is considered as the event  of the safety analysis for the modeling and its quan- tifications. The scenarios on Fukushima Unit 1 case is described by the periodic order in Figure 6 [10] where the initiating event of earthquake and reactor coolant supply success are shown.
There are modeling by SD based on the case of Fukushima Unit 1 accident scenarios. Figure 7 shows the main diagram of the modeling. The arrow lines represent the event flows, whereas the plus (+) and minus (−) signs described the event value summations and subtractions, respectively. For example, the event failure rate addition is described as the plus sign. If the situation is reverse, the value is minus. The box means the logical variable as accumulations of the variable values and some more variables like the constant and rates of the inputting variables [11]. One of advanta- geous points in the SD is the easiness to manipulate
the graphical and shape configurations of the pro- gramming, which is different from the conventional event/fault tree-based safety analysis. In the conven- tional event/fault tree diagram, the black/white color cannot give any kind of colorful meaning of the logical propagations. Otherwise, the importance meaning of the particular color in the SD could be  used in  the  SD software like Vensim code system. Color could be used to show the meaning of the event flows in the  analysis. In addition, the arrows usually give the event flow direction which is very simple to show the graph- ical considerations. Especially, there are some more cartoon-style pictures in the Vensim code systems. In this modeling, the explosion shape could give the opera- tor the meaning of system failure, because the explosion usually means the end of the system’s function. This shows the operator the meaning of event logic easily and fast. The variety of the functions in the SD with the
Figure6. Scenarios on Fukushima Unit  case [].
Figure 7. Diagram of modeling.
Figure 8. Modeling of water level below fuel top.
Vensim code software can give the multiple messages very effectively. Although the tree-based modeling could make a role in accident preventions for the  NPP facility, the SD-based analysis can make the efficiency much more, especially for the complex sys- tems like the NPPs  accident. In Figure  7, the UHS    is the final event which is connected by the ultimate heat removal, variables, and other related variables.
Figure 9. Modeling of ﬁre pumps with seawater.
The arrow lines are the directions of the event flows. Double line and some cartoon shapes are the logic of stock diagram where the accumulations of the event value are performed. This is different from the single
Table 2. Event values of the modeling.
Figure 10. Modeling of fresh water cooling.
arrow line where the event flow is shown. There are sub-algorithms shown in Figures 8–10. The modeling is connected linearly each other where the event scenario is based on the case of the Fukushima accident. In Figure 8, the earthquake is the initiating event which is connected to the next event by an arrow line until the water level below fuel top. In Figure 9, the core damage is connected to the next event until fire pumps with seawater. In Figure 10, the offsite electrical supply is connected to fresh water cooling.
3.Results and discussion
There are some results of the accident. The basic events are obtained by the Boolean values as 0 and 1 in Table 2. In the case of the earthquake, the values are obtained by random number generations between 0 and 1 in which
Figure 9. Diagrams of simulations for (a) water level below fuel top, (b) variables, (c) ultimate heat removal, and (d) ultimate heat sink.
Figure . Diagrams of simulations for (a) water level below fuel top, (b) variables, (c) ultimate heat removal, and (d) ultimate heat sink.
bly stabilized. Then, the value is increasing where the
system is going to be unstable due the system aging. Although the risk values of the summations are higher, the transient of the values could give the information of the situations. In this study, the plateau in the simu- lations means the situation does not get worse. That is, the complex algorithm incorporated with several feed- back event flows could give the much more reliable analysis. In the real situation of the nuclear accident, the operation actions could be investigated by the SD method with nonlinear ways. This means that the SD- based analysis can forecast the unexpected results of the accident. Figure 12 shows the simulations for para- metric models such as variables, ultimate heat removal, and UHS, where the related models’ simulations are shown.
The UHS is investigated in the aspect of the arti- ficial pool construction after the reactor building fail- ure. Although the nuclear industry has been one of major power sources in some countries, there was no effective and practical methods to control the failed plant structures. Current coolant injection-based sys- tem has three failure experiences in the emergency heat removal. The piping was broken away which resulted in environmental contaminations of the fatal hazard radiations. The current technology could control eas-ily the piping-based injection system in the conven- tional NPPs. However, it has been lessened that once the reactor system is failed, the injection system could be in the useless state. This means the safety system   is not adequate to nuclear system in which the neu- tronics characteristics could be changed within a sec- ond. For example, the delayed neutron could be decayed within a second, which is very important in the sta- bility of the nuclear reactor. So, the seconds in time scale of the nuclear reactions are out of human con- trol and it is impossible for the operator to come up with the situations. Hence, the failed reactor system should be submerged by constructing an artificial pool compartment.
Figure . Diagrams of simulations for parametric models: (a) variables, (b) ultimate heat removal, and (c) ultimate heat sink.
4.Conclusions
It is considered that the new structure  of  the  NPP can enhance the safety integrity. The construction technology of the concrete building has been devel- oped. The assembling method of the pool-type struc- ture could speed up construction schedule. In addition, the working robot could be utilized in near future after
developing the humanoid or the human functioning robots. If the broken nuclear fuels are submerged in the pool, the radiation leak to the environment could be significantly decreased and stopped eventually. In the case of Chernobyl nuclear accident, the concrete pour- ing produced some worse happenings that the nuclear fission took place in the concreted places with the failed nuclear fuel and its contents. Water is the best mate- rial to control the nuclear reactions. It could be imag- ined to create new material containing high hydrogen compounds. However, the economic factor could dis- turb the creation of the new compounds, because the industrial aspect should be considered. The expensive stuff is not used for commercial purposes.
The complex nonlinear algorithm of the SD has been applied to the several areas where the feedback algo- rithm is used to analyze the nuclear safety systems suc- cessfully. Since the conventional method is analyzed by the linear quantifications, it is difficult to reflect the cause–effect features. The event analysis could be done by non-linear method. Hence, the safety analysis could give very different results following the event sequences. Additionally, it is not to happen with the same char- acteristics, although the event conditions might be the same. An event in the NPPs happens following several kinds of situations, in which human error is one of the potential accident causes.
The ultimate purpose of the nuclear heat sink is the removal of the produced energy. Even though the cur- rent injection-based system is highly qualified, it is very reasonable to find a better system. As it is explained  in this paper, the new technology of the heat sink can block the severe nuclear accident where the uncontrol- lable heat affects the environment very seriously. So, it is imaginable to save the nature by minimizing the radi- ation damages. The new concept of this work could be a reasonable method in near future.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety (KINS) for support in publication.
