<title>RECOVERY OF PLATINOIDS FROM NPP SPENT NUCLEAR FUEL AND OUTLOOK FOR THEIR USE</title>
<Affiliation>Khlopin Radium Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia</Affiliation>
<author>Yu. A. Pokhitonov</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-020-00638-y</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00638-y</URL>
Abstract
For technical and economic reasons, the technology for extracting platinoids from irradiated fuel is a com- plex problem. The purpose of the present work was to analyze the content of platinoids in the products of the technological scheme used for reprocessing spent fuel, the most called for methods of extracting platinoids, and the outlook for using platinoids. The problem of extracting platinoids cannot be solved apart from the basic technology of recycling fissile materials. The recovery of rhodium and ruthenium must be considered in the context of the appearance of a real demand and palladium from the standpoint of its use in radio- chemical enterprises, for example, for immobilization of 129I and/or transplutonium elements, where high elemental purification is not needed.
The first publications concerning the separation of platinoids from the spent fuel of NPP appeared more than 50 years ago. Scientists expected to find simple methods of extracting these metals, which could replace Pd, Rh, and Ru from ore sources. The first works and the outlook for using technogenic platinoids were subjects of an IAEA review, according to which by 2025 the technogenic-platinoid amount in spent fuel should be equivalent to the reserves in the predicted ore sources [1]. Indeed, the yield of platinum-group metals in the fission of uranium is high, constituting kilograms per metric ton of fuel. This approach comported fully with the concept of complex reprocessing of spent fuel, generally accepted at that time.
The primary objective of reprocessing spent nuclear fuel is the recycling of fissile materials. For this reason, the extraction of platinoids cannot be solved apart from the primary technology. Moreover, industrial separation of platinoids from spent fuel can be realized only if a stable demand for them appears.
The objectives of the present article are to analyze the data on the amount of platinoids in spent fuel and to discuss the most called for methods of extraction and the prospects for the use of platinoids.
Economics and areas of use of platinoids in technology. Let us examine the production dynamics and the price changes on the world market over the last few decades. In the 1960s, palladium prices were approximately five times lower than platinum prices – 5.1 and 26.7 USD per gram, respectively. For this reason, palladium became the most promising of the platinum-group metals. Following an increase of demand in 1960–1980, the prices of palladium and rhodium increased by factor of 5–6. Ruthenium prices remained almost unchanged, and even decreased somewhat in 1980.
The primary producers of platinum metals at that time were South Africa and the Soviet Union. Already in the 1970s, the USSR was the main supplier of palladium on the world market. We note that in Russia the reserves of palladium are ap- proximately three times greater than the reserves of platinum, so that given the substantially lower production volumes of platinum as compared with South Africa our country produces a comparable amount. This allows Russia to influence the conditions in the world palladium market (Table 1).
The main reasons for the rise in the palladium prices were growth of the production of catalysts and, in part, the wide use of palladium in the electrotechnical industry. Starting in 1970, clean-air laws were adopted and set a limit on emissions, which resulted in mandatory use of catalytic systems in automobiles. The first catalysts appeared in 1975 in American and
TABLE 1. Palladium Production by Country and Region of the World, t [2]
TABLE 2. Global Production and Consumption of Rhodium, t [2]
then Japanese automobiles. Since 1986, they started to be used in Europe, Australia, and Asia. Modern autocatalysts are based on alloys of platinum with rhodium and palladium. In the 1990s, about half of the automobiles in operation and more than 80% of the automobiles sold possessed a catalyst for cleaning exhaust gases [3]. In 1996, in terms of global consumption, 37.3% of the platinum, 37.6% of the palladium, and 90.4% of the rhodium were used in automobile catalysts. By 1998, the consumption of palladium reached the record level 254.7 t, and its price reached 9.13 USD per gram [2]. By the end of January 2018, the price rose to 15.2 USD per gram, surpassing the platinum price 14.7 USD per gram. At the beginning of 2001, palladium reached its maximum price of 31–33 USD per gram. In 2002–2004, the price dropped, reaching in April 2004 its maximum price for the last six years 4.79 USD per gram. In August of the same year, the price of palladium was equal to 7 USD per gram. In 2015, the initial deliveries of palladium increased by 6% and reached 6.43 million ounces. In the first quarter of 2016, the prices started to recover, but not as strongly as for other precious metals (platinum and gold). In 2017, the palladium consumption increased by 9 t as compared with 2016 and was equal to 331 t. Correspondingly, the price rose by 42%, reaching a peak over the last 16 years of 1058 USD/ozt.
The change in the prices of rhodium in the last few years was also associated with its demand, primarily, in the pro- duction of catalyst (Table 2). In April 2018, the price of rhodium in the world market reached 2050–2100 USD per ounce. But the reasons for the price change in this case were associated with the political situation in the market, caused by American sanctions against Russian companies and not by the demand in any particular area of technology. In the opinion of analysts, the prices are rising smoothly without abrupt jumps [4].
The areas of use of ruthenium are diverse. Aside from alloys, it is used in the chemical and electrochemical indus- tries, electronics, and the aerospace industry (Table 3). Approximately 50% of the demand occurs in the electronic industry: ruthenium is used in the production of wear-resistant electric contacts and thin-film resistors. The chemical industry uses about 20% of world consumption, but it is also used in the glass industry as an additive in platinum and palladium alloys [5].
TABLE 3. Global Consumption of Ruthenium, t [5]
In 2009, ruthenium production dropped by 18% because of its mining reduction in South Africa, just as for other platinoids. Nonetheless, the world supplies supported demand. One of the largest companies is LONMIN (Great Britain), whose share of total global production is 26%. Ruthenium production also dropped in 2012 as a result of trouble in the mining industry in South Africa [6]. In 2017, ruthenium became a leader in the rise of platinoid prices. The rise in prices was associat- ed with an increase in demand in the Asian market, especially China, with simultaneous reduction in mining volume in South Africa and low mining level in Russia. While the world market volume is 30 t, the domestic market does not exceed 1 t. On February 25, 2019, the ruthenium price was 560.29 rubles.
It should be noted that the production of platinoids from spent catalyst in the automobile and chemical industries and from scrap in the electrotechnical and jewelry industries increases with each year. In addition, with each year this market segment becomes even more significant. The recycling of platinoids from technogenic raw material is considered to be prof- itable from the economic and environmental standpoints. Scrap containing 0.001–0.003% precious metals is recyclable, and modern technologies make it possible to extract up to 92–97% of the platinum and palladium. Several regulatory acts stimu- lating secondary use of electronic and electrotechnical scrap have been developed in the EU. The main objective of the direc-
tive lies in its provision of separate collection for subsequent reprocessing. According to experts, the problem of regeneration of spent autoсatalysts is quite acute in Russia, the cost of platinoids in spent catalyst exceeding 50·106 USD per year. In 2017,
the production of platinoids from secondary raw material increased by 13 t, which is primarily associated with an increase in the collection of automobile catalysts. The collection of electronic and jewelry scrap remained at the previous level.
In summary, it should be noted that before the 1990s the main consumers of palladium and rhodium were the elec- trotechnical industry and medicine (75%). Currently, they are mainly used in catalysts in the chemical industry and for af- ter-burning of exhaust gases in automobiles. Ruthenium is used in the electronic industry (~50%) and in the chemical and, in part, glass industries. Platinoids remain indispensable in different industries and engineering, and in many areas there are no possibilities of replacing them. The characteristics of palladium and rhodium compounds making it possible to expand their range of application have been studied intensively in the last few years. The use of palladium-containing catalysts for remov- ing toxic organic compounds from water on account of their deep and full oxidation is being studied [7]. A new sphere is application in gas sensors, devices for monitoring contamination of the environment. The use of palladium in solar batteries greatly increases their efficiency on account of improvements of the conductivity of metal semiconductor contacts. New ma- terials with thermoelectric properties have been developed on the basis of palladium and rhodium [8]. Information about the
development of methods for producing thermoelectric materials based on the compounds (CoPdPt)Sb3 for practical purposes is presented in [9]. Aside from catalysis, one of the main spheres of application of palladium is the separation of hydrogen
isotopes as well as the purification, storage, and transport of hydrogen [10, 11].
An area of application of platinoids extracted from spent fuel could be, first of all, nuclear energy, for example, ab- sorption of hydrogen and protection from excess pressure in the vessels of reactors with boiling water [12, 13]. Titanium- palladium containers can be used for disposal of high-level wastes in geological formations [14, 15]. The corrosion resistance of metallic containers for disposal of long-life radionuclides and spent fuel is studied in [15]. Hastelloy and an alloy of palla- dium with titanium possess the highest resistance to corrosion. In this case the use of palladium containing long-life 107Pd has no effect on the quality of the products.
TABLE 4. Content of Platinoids in Spent Fuel, Possible Extraction at Mayak Association from Spent Fuel with Burnup 33 GW·days/t in Reprocessing 200 t/yr, Global Production
Another direction could be obtaining thermochemical long-lasting matrices for immobilizing 129I or transplutonium elements. Hardly soluble palladium iodide is well-known; it could be a compound for long-term storage and/or final disposal of 129I. The use of reactor palladium for synthesis of such products is justified in this case [16, 17].
Another solution concerns picking compositions for immobilization or transmutation of transplutonium elements. A distinguishing feature of palladium, as compared with all other platinoids, is its capacity to dissolve in nitric acid. For this reason, when necessary to extract from palladium-based materials used for long-time storage of transplutonium elements, it will be sufficient to dissolve them in nitric acid followed by extraction separation of the required, for example, americium and curium [18, 19].
We also note that palladium is not the only element among the fission products that can be used as the initial mate- rial for ceramic forms of the wastes. In reprocessing of fuel, the zirconium cladding of fuel rods is one of the forms of solid wastes. The zirconium separated on reprocessing can be used to synthesize mineral-like materials meeting the requirements for immobilization of high-level waste. Technetium could also be promising for obtaining protective coatings of solidified forms of high-level waste.
Platinoids in spent fuel in relation to the volume of their global production from raw ore. Comparing the con- tent of platinoids in 1 t of spent fuel and the market prices we obtain the general cost (50–60)·103 USD (Table 4). But, is it
justifiable to compare the prices for in-fuel platinoids with their market prices?
The rhodium in spent fuel is represented by 102Rh (T1/2 2.9 yr), 102mRh (207 days), 103Rh, 103mRh (56.1 min), and 106Rh (29.8 sec). Thus, after a decay period of 50–60 yr, it will be suitable for unrestricted use. Its market price can be the same as for mined rhodium. The ruthenium in spent fuel is represented by stable nuclides with mass number 99, 100, 101, 102, 104 and radionuclides with half-life 4.4 h (105Ru), 39.3 days (103Ru), and 376.1 days (106Ru). By analogy with rhodium, post-decay ruthenium will have minimal activity and there will be no obstacles for its use in any areas. The situation with palladium is more complex. Among its nuclides formed in a reactor, the only radioactive one is 107Pd with half-life 6.5 105 yr and 35 keV β-radiation. The 107Pd fraction is only 15 wt.% of the remaining stable isotopes of palladium.
The amount of spent fuel which has accumulated in the world is equal to ~3·105 t, and about 104 t is unloaded yearly from reactors. Only about 2000 t/yr, or less than 1% of the amount accumulated and placed in storage, enters into reprocessing. Analysis shows that even on separation of platinoids with yield >90% it will not be possible to replace an appreciable fraction of their production from ore. The production of platinoids from secondary raw material now amounts to about 100 t/yr, and it will increase with each year. Comparing the data it can be concluded that NPP fuel can replace in significant measure the native raw sources of platinoids with reprocessing of (5–20)·104 t per year. Hence it follows that even if plants are built and repurposed to the separation of platinoids, the platinoid amount will not meet the demand. Currently, a weighty amount of technogenic platinoids capable of replacing native resources and influencing price dynamics cannot be expected to appear on the market. In addition, although these reserves are a renewable resource, realistic prospects for adoption are postponed for many decades.
At the same time, the development of effective technologies for separating platinoids cannot result in their adoption in industry if a stable demand for them does not appear. The prospects for adoption in industry will be determined only by the requirements of technology and the possibility of their appearance in the market at lower prices compared with the cost from ores.
The demand for such an unconventional source remains problematic. If a comparatively small amount of platinoids is needed in one or another area of technology (kilograms, tens of kilograms), such a source will hardly be needed. It is easier to purchase, even at a higher price. Moreover, it is impossible to replace native sources for amounts of several metric tons
because of the limited capacities of the spent-fuel reprocessing enterprises.
Previously [3], ideas were advanced for separating 107Pd and the stable isotopes of palladium. The estimated cost was equal to 1–10 USD per gram. In a later work, the cost of 102Pd obtained by laser technology reaches 7·105 USD per gram [20]. Even if the cost of isotopic separation (separation of 107Pd) can be reduced by a factor of 1000, the economics will not be acceptable for industrial production. All attempts to obtain 107Pd-free palladium will be unsuccessful. Hypothetically, the situation can change and isotopic separation could be needed if significant demand for 107Pd appears.
However, perfection of schemes for reprocessing fuel and extracting platinoids from it has a positive effect on the vitrification operation. The formation of an autonomous metallic phase adversely affects glassmaking, so that provisions must be made for preliminary extraction of platinoids from the raffinate, even if the problem of their separation is not posed and there is no demand for them.
Moreover, in the next few decades new directions may appear in technology where platinides will be needed and where their radioactivity will not be an obstacle to their use. One such direction could be hydrogen energy or the radiochem- ical industry.
The development of a comprehensive technology for separating individual platinoids from fuel to be reprocessed could be called for in the future when only stable rhodium and ruthenium isotopes will remain and the low activity of other fission products will make them more accessible and cheap.
Distribution and separation of platinoids in the reprocessing of spent fuel. The special behavior of plati- num-group metals and their distribution over the technological scheme have a decisive impact in picking methods of separa- tion. An understanding of these questions plays an important role, since the products of reprocessing different significantly both in terms of the specific activity and composition as well as the content of platinum-group metals in them.
In the reprocessing of fuel, palladium, rhodium, and ruthenium are distributed over two products: the insoluble pre- cipitate of the dissolution unit and raffinates of the first extraction cycle. The presence of platinoids in the insoluble precipi- tates is associated with the formation of compounds (alloys) that contain platinoids, technetium, fission products, and ac- tinides. Fuel burnup is the main factor determining their amount. Molybdenum and zirconium play an important role in the formation of precipitates together with the platinoids [20–23]. It is precisely their presence that is the reason for the formation of secondary precipitates [23]. Under sufficiently stringent conditions of dissolution, the content of platinoids in the precipi- tates can be minimal. At the same time, in picking dissolution parameters, it is possible to create conditions for transferring platinum-group metals into the precipitate for purposes of their subsequent extraction or long-time storage.
Insoluble precipitates are of interest because, in the first place, their amount and composition determine the choice of equipment for the solution clarification operation prior to extraction. Currently, in the reprocessing of fuel by the Pyrex process the dissolution parameters are determined by the requirements of obtaining solutions for separation of uranium and plutonium and are not associated with the separation of platinoids. Changing the conditions of dissolution can lead to a situ- ation where the platinoids will be completely in solution and will turn out to be in the raffinate after the first extraction cycle. Other, ancillary phenomena owing to the presence of platinoids in real process solutions must also be taken into  account. The presence of palladium in the operation of reductive re-extraction of plutonium can lead to the formation of interphase precipitates. The reason for their appearance are not only compounds formed at the dissolution stage but also the products of destruction of the extracting agent and additions of silicic acid in the solutions and the extraction of uranium and plutonium in the first cycle. The negative influence of platinum-group metals manifests in the vitrification operation. The formation of an autonomous metallic phase adversely impacts glassmaking, which significantly reduces the operating time of
the equipment [24, 25].
Many methods have been proposed to separate palladium from solutions. This is because the chemistry of its com- pounds in nitrate media is simpler and better understood. The situation with reactor rhodium is much more complex. Existing technological processes for separating it from native sources are based on the use of chloride compounds. For this reason, the experience gained in separating plutonium from raw material is not applicable to nitric acid media. The purpose of the initial works on the separation of ruthenium from nitric acid solutions was the desire to increase the degree of purification of urani- um and plutonium in the first extraction cycle of the Pyrex process. But there are no publications where separation of ruthe- nium is considered for the purpose of obtaining the desired product.
In the extraction of platinoids from water solutions, the methods allowing the separation of not one but several metals simultaneously are of greatest interest. The main requirement in picking one or another method is still compatibility with the technological scheme of reprocessing spent fuel, including fractionation of high-level components and their subsequent disposal.
The initial publications on the extraction of platinoids and individual fission products appeared when there was still no experience in using extraction technologies. For this reason, attention was focused on sorption methods, and activated carbon was used as an adsorbent. Activated carbon was used in the Radium Institute and the Mayak Association. In the exper- iments, palladium was separated, for the first time, from real solutions (raffinates of the first extraction cycle). In the experi- ments, 660 g of reactor palladium was obtained. In subsequent work, sorbents of different classes were used. Russian-made
ampholyte VP1-AP turned out to be successful in the sorption of palladium from nitric acid solutions [26]. The coefficient of purification 3·102 from β-emitting radionuclides with 88.6% extraction was obtained in the experiments.
The number of publications on the separation of platinoids from the raffinate of the first extraction cycle, using ex- tracting agents of different classes, increased as the extraction technologies improved. For the separation of fission product elements, including platinoids, it should be kept in mind that the main task of the reprocessing of spent fuel is the separation of uranium, plutonium, and a concentrate of fission products and transuranium elements, not the extraction of platinoids. Ideally, the separation of platinoids should be one of the operations in the already adopted technology. Among the extracting agents proposed for reprocessing high-level waste, systems based on neutral phospho-organic compounds are of interest – alkylphosphine oxides and carbamoylphosphine oxides. Selective separation of palladium can also be accomplished together with separation of transplutonium and rare-earth elements, uranium, and plutonium within the framework of already devel- oped variants of the Truex process [27]. Two additional classes of promising extraction systems must be mentioned: calix- arenes and dipicolinic diamides [28, 29].
At the same time, in the development of fractionation schemes the economic expediency of using one or another scheme remains unresolved. If fractionation and reprocessing of the wastes formed in fulfilling military programs does not raise any doubts in economic expediency, for the reprocessing of other high-level wastes this conclusion is not obvious. The choice of fractionation and subsequent immobilization of waste can be made after careful analysis of many factors, including the cost of reprocessing. In any case, fractionation is associated with subsequent production of matrices for disposal, so that it cannot be regarded apart from the entire technology.
Electrochemical and precipitation methods, in contrast to extraction methods, can be realized on an individual prod- uct. In this case, these operations will not make it necessary to adjust the main scheme of the recycling of fissile nuclides and
subsequently reprocess high-level waste. In experiments with nitric acid concentration 2.5 mol/liter and current density at the cathode 500 mA/cm2, the following yield was obtained (%): 23 ruthenium, 28 rhodium, 94 palladium, and 68 technetium.
Thus, the difference of the potentials of precipitation and dissolution of precipitated metals makes it possible to quantitatively extract and separate platinum-group metals [30–32]. In the proposed concept platinum metals are separated from solution by an electrochemical method, after which uranium, plutonium, are extracted neptunium and subsequently americium and curi- um are extracted from the raffinate.
Experiments on picking the regime for electrochemical separation of palladium were also performed at the Radium Institute [33, 34]. The final stage was checking the separation of palladium from the real solutions obtained and reprocessing spent fuel from NPP. In contrast to the generally accepted electrochemical precipitation schemes, a short-circuited electrode pair was used for the separation of palladium.
The primary advantages of precipitation methods of separating platinoids are the simplicity of the apparatus and the possibility of high purification in a single operation. However, this method was rarely used in the search for a technology for extracting platinoids from high-level waste. The precipitation of palladium in the form of a metal by using carbon monoxide CO is preferable to precipitation in the form of hardly soluble compounds, since the formed volumetric precipitate is poorly filtered and often captures the mother liquor [35]. It should be noted that most studies were performed on model solutions and must be checked on real high-level solutions.
The new approaches to methods of separation of platinoids must become an integral part of the improvement of the schemes used for reprocessing spent fuel. The implementation of the proposed approach comes down to maximum simplifi- cation of the scheme together with the necessary and adequate purification of fissile materials. The extraction of platinoids for commercial use cannot be solved apart from the main technology.
Conclusion. Even with sufficiently complete separation of platinoids from spent fuel it will not be possible to make
up for the appreciable role of their production from ores. To make up for the native raw sources of platinoids, it is necessary to reprocess (5–20)·104 t of spent fuel yearly. Improvements in the platinoid separation technologies must proceed in parallel with the development of an innovative, less-expensive technology for reprocessing fuel.
The appearance of new directions in technology in which radioactivity will not be an obstacle to usage could influ- ence the change in the platinoid extraction technology. The first step on the path to industrial application of reactor palladium could become its use in the radiochemical industry – isolation of radioactive wastes, fabrication of containers, catching hy- drogen (tritium) in NPP. Hydrogen energy can become another direction.
The solution of the entire complex of problems associated with perfecting platinoid separation technologies must be clearly separated in time. In the nearest future, methods of separating individual platinoids in real solutions must be checked and the cost must be estimated. In radiochemical enterprises the adoption of operations for preliminary separation of plati- noids from raffinate prior to vitrification will have a beneficial effect.
Special attention must be given to the management of insoluble precipitate and removal of platinoid concentrate in order to keep the possibility of extracting them in the future. The separation of platinoids from all of the fuel entering repro- cessing could be called for when only stable rhodium and ruthenium are present in them and the lower activity of other fission products will make them more accessible and less-expensive.
