<title>Photon energy absorption coefﬁcients for nuclear track detectors using Geant4 Monte Carlo simulation</title>
<Affiliation>a.Department of Physics, Karnatak University, Dharwad 580003, India;b.Health Physics Section, Kaiga Atomic Power Station-3&4, NPCIL, Karwar 581400, India;c.Experimental Nuclear Physics Department, Nuclear Research Centre, P.O. 13759, Cairo, Egypt;d.Institute of High Energy Physics, CAS, Beijing 100049, China</Affiliation>
<author>Vishwanath P. Singh , M.E. Medhat, N.M. Badiger </author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2014.07.001</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2014.07.001 </URL>
abstract
Geant4 Monte Carlo code simulations were used to solve experimental and theoretical complications for calculation of mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients of elements, air, and compounds. The mass energy- absorption coefﬁcients for nuclear track detectors were computed ﬁrst time using Geant4 Monte Carlo code for energy 1 keV–20 MeV. Very good agreements for simulated results of mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients for carbon, nitrogen, silicon, sodium iodide and nuclear track detectors were observed on comparison with the values reported in the literatures. Kerma relative to air for energy 1 keV–20 MeV and energy absorption buildup factors for energy 50 keV–10 MeV up to 10 mfp penetration depths of the selected nuclear track detectors were also calculated to evaluate the absorption of the gamma photons. Geant4 simulation can be utilized for estimation of mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients in elements and composite materials.
Keywords
Geant4   Mass energy-absorption         coefﬁcients        Kerma   Nuclear track detectors    Buildup factor
1.Introduction
The most important quantity characterizing the radiation interacting in extended media is the absorbed dose which repre- sents the energy transferred to the matter. The dose  quantity  is one of the important parameter for radiation protection, dose measurement, radiation effect and defects in the material.  The  dose delivered to a medium is measured in terms of mass energy- absorption coefﬁcient,  men/ρ, which  is a an  essential  quantity used
in  medical  physics,  radiation  physics,  health  physics,  radiation
biology, radiotherapy, irradiation technology, and other practical applications. It is not possible to calculate men/ρ directly, but it is necessary to use mass energy-transfer coefﬁcient, mtr/ρ. The amount of photon energy transferred is dependent upon interac-
tion process namely the photoelectric effect, compton  scattering and pair production. These interaction processes are dependent upon atomic numbers of the elements of compound/mixture and photon energy.
Mass energy-absorption coefﬁcient (indirectly mass energy- transfer coefﬁceint) is a measure of average fraction of photon energy transferred to kinetic energy  of  the  charged  particle  when photon interacts with a material. Photoelectric absorption, incoherent scattering and pair/triplet production exhibit these characterisitics, whereas coherent scattering transfers negligible photon energy. These events are playing a crucial role in the calculation of energy-absorption coefﬁcients (Hubbell, 1969, 1977). The intreraction of gamma photon with the matter is a complex process where different types of events are occuring in the medium. It is found that there are various factors (average fraction of kinetic energy of secondary photon, incident photon energy, additive law for mixture, etc.) affecting the calculation of the energy absorption.
Various  researchers  have  calculated  and    measured   the mass energy-absorption coefﬁcietnts. The mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients of the biological samples are parameterized in the photon energy range 200–1500 keV (Manjunathguru and Umesh, 2009). Rosemary (1961) has tabulated and discussed gamma photon energy absorption and transfer theoretically. Hubbell and Berger (1968) have calculated absorption coefﬁ- cients for air, water and 18 elements over the photon energy range   of   10 keVr E r 10 MeV.   Hubbell   (1977)   calculated   the mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients for H, C, N, O, Ar and seven mixtures for energies from 0.1 keV to 20 MeV. Hubbell (1982) again has calculated energy-absorption coefﬁcients theoreti- cally for 40 elements ranging from hydrogen (Z ¼ 1) to uranium (Z ¼ 92) and for 45 mixtures and compounds of dosimetric interest from 1 keV to 20 MeV. Hubbell (1982) has used the fraction-by-weight of the constituents of the compounds. Higgins et al. (1992) have calculated the the mass energy- absorption coefﬁcients theoretically for 47 media from 1 keV  to 100 MeV. Gurler et al. (2000) have calculated the absorption coefﬁcients for aluminum and water. Ban et al. (1993) have obtained mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients for nitrogen and argon experimentally at 30 keV gamma ray. Bhandal et al. (1994) have estimated the mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients of fatty acids for gamma rays using 662 and 1115 keV energies. Bradley et al. (1989) have determined the mass energy- absorption coefﬁcients for parafﬁn experimentally. Singh et al. (1996) have mesaured the mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients for 10 compounds experimentally for 662 keV gamma ray. Shakhreet et al. (2003) measured the mass energy-absorption
2.
Theoretical background and computational method
A few elements (nitrogen, carbon and silicon), air, sodium iodide and some soild state and plastic nuclear track detectors; quartz (SiO2), sodalime glass (73SiO2:14Na2O:9CaO:4M- gO:0.15Al2O3: 0.03K2O:0.02TiO2:0.1Fe2O3), PC (C16H14O3: Makro-
fol, Lexan, Millar), PET (C10H8O4), CN (C6H8O9N2:Daicell, LR-115) and CR-39 (C12H18O7) have been considered for investigation of gamma photon energy absorption by mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients and energy absorption buildup factors. The effective atomic numbers and electron densities of these nuclear track detectors are found in the literature (Medhat, 2011).
2.1.Mass energy-absorption coefﬁcient
The mass energy-absorption coefﬁcient, men/ρ, is a measure of the  average  fractional  amount  of  incident  photon  energy  trans-
ferred to kinetic energy of charged particles as a result of gamma- ray interaction. This imparted charged particle kinetic energy is valid approximation for the amount of energy made available for the production of chemical, biological and other effects associated with exposure due to ionizing radiation (ICRU-33). The men/ρ is  the
product  of  mass  energy-transfer  coefﬁcient,  mtr/ρ  (cm2/g) and
(1— g),  where  g  is  the  fraction  of  the  energy  of  the  secondary
charged particle that is lost to bremsstrahlung in the material. The mass energy-absorption  coefﬁcient of  a  compound or composite is
calculated   using   mixture   rule   (ðμen=ρÞcomposite ¼   ∑nwiðμen=ρÞi)
coefﬁcients of parafﬁn wax and gypsum at 662 keV experimen-
where w
i
is the proportion by weight and (m /ρ
tally.    Oz    et    al.    (2006)   have    calculated   the mass   energy-	i
en )i is the mass
absorption coefﬁcients for silicon, carbon, copper and sodium iodide theoretically. Gurler et al. (2000) have calculated mass energy-absorption coeifﬁcients for nitrogen and mass energy- transfer coefﬁceints for silicon, carbon copper, nirogen and sodium iodide in photon energy of 0.4–10 MeV, and showed very good agreement with earlier literature values. Other attempt is made for calculation of mass energy-absorption coeifﬁcients of optical ﬁber and thermoluminiscent dosimeter in photon energy of 0.2–20 MeV using Monte Carlo N-particle code version 5 (Hossain and Wagiran, 2012).
The theoretical method for calculation of the mass energy- absoprtion coefﬁceint is a complicated process. The experimetal values of the mass energy-absoprtion coefﬁceints are found for some compounds for very limited energies. After review of the literature, it has been found that this area requires investigation for ﬁnding easy ways of estimation of the mass energy- absoprtion coefﬁceints. This encouraged us to utilize Geant4 Monte Carlo simulation method for calculation of the mass energy-absoprtion coefﬁceints. Therefore, this present work aims to calculate the mass energy-absoprtion coefﬁceints of elements (carbon, nitrogen, silicon), air, sodium iodide, and some nuclear track detectors. The Geant4 simulation results of elements and sodium iodide were found to be in very good agreement with earlier literature data. First of all the Geant4 code simulated results of mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients of elements, air and sodium iodide were validated with available literature data for photon energy 0.4–10 MeV, and then Geant4 was utilized for simulation for photon energy 1 keV –20 MeV. Geant4 simulation was utilized for calculation of mass energy- absoprtion coefﬁceints for some nuclear track detectors. The air kerma and energy absorption buildup factors were also ana- lyzed for the nuclear track detectors. Geant4 Monte carlo simulation was used for ﬁrst time for calculation of the mass energy-absoprtion coefﬁceints.  At  present Geant4 Monte carlo simulation  has  been  used  for  mass  attenuation  coefﬁcients  of composite materials and standarized the experimental set-up 2.Theoretical background and computational method
A few elements (nitrogen, carbon and silicon), air, sodium iodide and some soild state and plastic nuclear track detectors; quartz (SiO2), sodalime glass (73SiO2:14Na2O:9CaO:4M- gO:0.15Al2O3: 0.03K2O:0.02TiO2:0.1Fe2O3), PC (C16H14O3: Makro-
fol, Lexan, Millar), PET (C10H8O4), CN (C6H8O9N2:Daicell, LR-115) and CR-39 (C12H18O7) have been considered for investigation of gamma photon energy absorption by mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients and energy absorption buildup factors. The effective atomic numbers and electron densities of these nuclear track detectors are found in the literature (Medhat, 2011).
2.1.Mass energy-absorption coefﬁcient
The mass energy-absorption coefﬁcient, men/ρ, is a measure of the  average  fractional  amount  of  incident  photon  energy  trans-
ferred to kinetic energy of charged particles as a result of gamma- ray interaction. This imparted charged particle kinetic energy is valid approximation for the amount of energy made available for the production of chemical, biological and other effects associated with exposure due to ionizing radiation (ICRU-33). The men/ρ is  the product  of  mass  energy-transfer  coefﬁcient,  mtr/ρ  (cm2/g) and (1— g),  where  g  is  the  fraction  of  the  energy  of  the  secondary charged particle that is lost to bremsstrahlung in the material. The mass energy-absorption  coefﬁcient of  a  compound or composite is calculated   using   mixture   rule   (ðμen=ρÞcomposite ¼   ∑nwiðμen=ρÞi)
where w
f estimation of the mass energy- absoprtion coefﬁceints. This encouraged us to utilize Geant4 Monte Carlo simulation method for calculation of the mass energy-absoprtion coefﬁceints. Therefore, this present work aims to calculate the mass energy-absoprtion coefﬁceints of elements (carbon, nitrogen, silicon), air, sodium iodide, and some nuclear track detectors. The Geant4 simulation results of elements and sodium iodide were found to be in very good agreement with earlier literature data. First of all the Geant4 code simulated results of mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients of elements, air and sodium iodide were validated with available literature data for photon energy 0.4–10 MeV, and then Geant4 was utilized for simulation for photon energy 1 keV –20 MeV. Geant4 simulation was utilized for calculation of mass energy- absoprtion coefﬁceints for some nuclear track detectors. The air kerma and energy absorption buildup factors were also ana- lyzed for the nuclear track detectors. Geant4 Monte carlo simulation was used for ﬁrst time for calculation of the mass energy-absoprtion coefﬁceints.  At  present Geant4 Monte carlo
simulation  has  been  used  for  mass  attenuation  coefﬁcients  of energy-absorption coefﬁcient of the ith elements. The mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients of elements are avaialable using differernt methods.
2.2.Geant4 simulation code
Monte Carlo simulation is found to be an effective tool to calculate radiation interaction parameters in different types of compounds/mixtures for shielding, energy deposition and dosi- metry. Geant4 code is based on object-oriented programming and allows user to derive classes to describe the detector geometry, primary particle generator and physics processes models along electromagnetic, hadronic, and decay physics based on theory, materials and elements, experimental data or parameterizations. Most of the physics processes models include multiple scattering, ionization, Bremsstrahlung, positron annihilation, photo-electric effect, Compton and Rayleigh scattering, pair production, synchro- tron and transition radiation, Cherenkov effect, refraction, reﬂec- tion, absorption, scintillation, ﬂuorescence, and Auger electrons emission (Agostinelli et al., 2003; CERN, 2007). The Geant4 simulation  toolkit  covers  a  wide  energy  range  starting  from 250 eV to TeV. The Geant4 simulation is the modeling of the  photon interaction through materials in computer environment which gives ﬂexibility and ease of use, instead of performing an experimental determination of mass energy-attenuation coefﬁ- cient of different composite materials. Mass energy-attenuation of photons is calculated by simulating all relevant physical processes and interactions before and after inserting the materials under investigation (Medhat and Wang, 2013).
2.3.Kerma
The kinetic energy per unit mass (Kerma) relative to air, Ka, of the detectors is derived by the following equation:
@1
The mass energy-absorption coefﬁcient, men/ρ, of the nuclear track detectors and air is computed using the mixture rule explained above. The values of μen/ρ of elements are taken from literature (Hubbell and Seltzer, 1995).
2.3.1.Energy absorption buildup factor
The energy absorption buildup factor (EABF) values of the selected nuclear track detectors are  possible  to  compute  using  the Geometrical Progression (G-P) ﬁtting method. The detailed description for computation of EABF can be found in the recent literatures (Singh and Badiger, 2013, 2014; Singh et al.,  2014a, 2014b).
The buildup factors are estimated by using G-P ﬁtting para- meters (b, c, a, Xk and d) in the photon energy range 0.015–15 MeV up to 40 mfp using the equations (Harima et al. 1986,  Harima, 1993) given below:
@2
@3
@4
where x is the distance from source (mfp) and b, the value of the buildup factor at 1 mfp and K(E,x) is the dose multiplicative factor. The variation of K (E,x) with penetration represents the change in the shape of the spectrum from that at 1 mfp which determines the value of b.
Table 1 (a) Comparison of mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients (cm2/g) of carbon, nitrogen for 0.4–10 MeV photon energy.
3.Results and discussion
The mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients computed using  Geant4 simulation for carbon, nitrogen and silicon elements, and sodium iodide are given in Table 1(a) and (b). The variation of mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients of the nuclear track detectors with photon energy is shown in Figs. 1 and 2 using Geant4
Fig. 1. Mass energy-absorption coefﬁcient for nuclear track detectors and air using Geant4 simulation code.
Fig. 2. Mass energy-absorption coefﬁcient for nuclear track detectors and air using the theoretical data by Hubbell and Seltzer (1995).
Fig. 3. Kerma relative to air for nuclear track detectors using Geant4 simulation code.
simulation code and Hubbell and Seltzer (1995). The  kerma  relative to air using Geant4 is shown  graphically  in  Fig.  3  and the energy absorption buildup factors are given in Table 2.
3.1.Mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients
The mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients, μen/ρ, of carbon, nitrogen, silicon and sodium iodide using Geant4 simulation are given in Table 1(a, b) for photon energy of 0.4–10 MeV. The μen/ρ values of these elements and sodium iodide by different investi- gators (Rosemary, 1961; Hubbell and Berger, 1968; Hubbell, 1982; Higgins et al., 1992; Oz et al., 2006; Hubbell and Seltzer, 1995; Gurler et al., 2009) are given in Table 1(a, b). It was found that the Geant4 simulation results for the selected elements (carbon, nitrogen and silicon) and sodium iodide are in very good agree- ment with the earlier reported data in the literatures. The vari- ation of μen/ρ values of the nuclear track detectors and air is  shown in Figs. 1 and 2 using Geant4 simulation and theoretical (Hubbell and Seltzer, 1995) respectively. Figs. 1 and 2 show that  the Geant4 simulation provides the results similar to the theoretical
Table 2 Energy absorption buildup factors for nuclear track detectors.
calculation  by  Hubbell  and  Seltzer  (1995).   The  μen/ρ  values   of medical, biological, tissue substitutes and composite materials can also be simulated using the present standard Geant4 code. The Geant4 code produces μen/ρ values of the elements, mixtures and compounds in very good agreement with earlier reported data by solving experimental and theoretical complications.
3.2.Kerma
Using Geant4 code simulation for μen/ρ results, the variation of Kerma of the nuclear track detectors relative to air with photon energy (1 keV–20 MeV) is shown in Fig. 3. In general the Kerma values of all the nuclear track detectors are in range of unity above 100 keV photon energy (i.e. beyond photoelectric effect). However, there is a variation in Kerma for composites containing slightly high-Z elements (quartz and soda lime). The reason for such variation in kerma is due to large photon energy transfer for high-Z elements as the photoelectric cross section is proportional to Z4–5. Similar behaviors are observed for alcohols and tissue substitutes (Singh and Badiger, 2013; Singh et al., 2014). It is easy to calculate the kerma relative to air using theoretical μen/ρ by Hubbell and Seltzer (1995) similar to Geant4 results.
3.3.Energy absorption buildup factors
The energy absorption buildup factors of the nuclear track detectors for the selected photon energy (0.05, 0.1, 1 and 10 MeV)
for penetration depths 0.5, 1, 5 and 10 mfps are given in Table 2. The energy absorption buildup factors of the nuclear track detec- tors are small for low-penetration depth whereas it is found bigger for large-penetration depths.
4.Conclusions
In the present paper the mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients of carbon, nitrogen, silicon, air, sodium iodide, and some nuclear track detectors were calculated using Geant4 simulation code. There was a very good agreement between Geant4 simulation  code with the data tables published earlier (Rosemary, 1961; Hubbell and Berger, 1968; Hubbell, 1982; Higgins et al., 1992;Oz et al., 2006; Hubbell and Seltzer, 1995; Gurler et al., 2009). The present simulation code should be considered as a standard for calculation of mass energy-absorption coefﬁcients for any ele- ments and composite/compound materials.
