<title>Commissioning of the UK NAtional Nuclear Array</title>
<Affiliation>a.National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, Middlesex TW11 0LW, UK
b.Department of Physics, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, UK</Affiliation>
<author>R. Shearman, S.M. Collins, G. Lorusso, M. Rudigier, S.M. Judge, S.J. Bella,Zs. Podolyak, P.H. Regan</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.02.007</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.02.007</URL>
ABSTRACT
The NAtional Nuclear Array (NANA) is a LaBr3(Ce)-based coincidence gamma-ray spectrometer which can be used to identify, and enhance with respect to the background, signature gamma-ray emissions associated with particular radionuclide decays from a complex multi-component spectrum. Gamma-ray energy coincidence measurements using the NANA have been made using a digital data acquisition system based on CAEN V1751C 1 GHz digitizers. The improved time resolution oﬀered by LaBr3(Ce) crystals compared to similar-sized solid state detectors can provide narrow time-correlated, gamma-ray energy coincidence matrices that can be interrogated to select discrete gamma-ray emissions associated with particular radionuclide decays. This paper provides an overview of the operational characteristics of the NANA spectrometer, including energy resolution and full-energy peak eﬃciency parameters, and provides an example of double and triple gamma-ray coincidence gating on decays associated with the nuclear fuel waste product 134Cs. The full-energy peak eﬃciency response of the spectrometer is compared to Monte Carlo GEANT4 simulations.
Keywords:
Coincidence gamma-ray spectroscopy Nuclear decay assay
Radioactivity measurement Radiation standards
LaBr3(Ce) scintillation detectors
1.Introduction
The NAtional Nuclear Array, NANA, is a 12 element LaBr3(Ce) scintillation detector array, based at the UK's National Physical Laboratory (NPL). It is designed for use in nuclear spectroscopy measurements by the detection of discrete energy, characteristic gamma rays emitted from excited nuclear states (Bucurescu et al., 2016; Lorusso et al., 2016; Regan et al., 2015a, 2015b). LaBr3(Ce) scintillator crystals are currently of interest to the radiation measurement community as a gamma-ray detector material which combines fast timing response and suﬃcient energy resolution ( Browne et al., 2015; Bucurescu et al., 2016; Lalkovski et al., 2015; Regan et al., 2012, 2013, 2015a, 2015b; Régis et al., 2014a, 2014b; Roberts et al., 2014; Rudigier et al., 2015; Werner et al., 2016). Spectroscopic quality LaBr3(Ce) scintillator detectors are currently utilised in a number of nuclear structure and decay physics experiments worldwide; for example as part of the DESPEC-FATIMA collaboration (Lalkovski et al., 2015; Regan et al., 2012; Roberts et al., 2014) and the RoSPHERE gamma-ray spectrometer at IFIN-HH Bucharest (Bucurescu et al., 2016). In many of these conﬁgurations, the LaBr3(Ce) detectors are complemented with high-resolution hyper- pure germanium (HPGe) detectors in hybrid set-ups that provide superior timing triggers for gamma-ray cascades, allowing for the measurement of nuclear excited state lifetimes down to ~10 ps (Régis et al., 2014a, 2014b).
This paper presents the results of commissioning measurements for the NAtional Nuclear Array. Experimentally determined values for the full-energy peak detection eﬃciency and linearity of energy response are measured using well-characterised, mixed-isotope radioactive sources. These full-energy peak eﬃciency (FEP) measurements are compared to simulations of the array's response which were made using the GEANT4 Monte Carlo code (Agostinelli et al., 2013). The application of the NANA for the selection of two and three gamma-ray decay cascades from a mixed radioactive source of 134Cs and 137Cs is also investigated, highlighting the potential use of this LaBr3(Ce) array for future radionuclide (waste) assay.
2.Dimensions, modelling and measurement of the response of the NAtional Nuclear Array
In order to maximise the functionality of the array for diﬀerent applications, a GEANT4 simulation of the spectrometer was con- structed within the NPTooL framework (Matta et al., 2016). The GEANT4 simulation includes the front window, the can, the detector material and a borosilicate glass plate representing the photomultiplier tube. A simple representation of the frame has also been constructed within the model. Fig. 1 shows the constructed model deﬁned within NPTool for the GEANT4 simulation of the NANA array.
The complete NANA design comprised twelve individual LaBr3(Ce)
Fig. 1. NPTool model used for the Monte Carlo simulation of the 12 element NANA gamma-ray spectrometer.
Table 1
Detector angles for the twelve positions in the NAtional Nuclear Array. Note that the angles are with respect to the axes given in Fig. 1.
detectors, with lead shielding to reduce Compton cross talk between detectors. Eight of the detectors are in a central ring with a 45° mutual angular spacing. This central ring is complemented by four additional detectors at backward angles relative to the central annulus. The details of the detector angles in the ﬁnal NANA geometry are given in Table 1. The typical distance from the central (source) position to the front of the LaBr3(Ce)detector face was 78 mm.
The energy resolution, timing and full-energy peak response of the 8 detectors in the central annulus were measured using a thin ﬁlm vinyl source mounted on a bespoke 3D printed source holder. The source holder was designed to not shadow any detectors and to minimize any inhomogeneous eﬃciencies. Using this mixed source, full-energy-peak calibration and eﬃciency response curves were produced. The latter was used to validate the Monte Carlo simulations for the full-energy peak detection eﬃciency of the array.
2.1.Linearity and energy calibration of NANA
The LaBr3(Ce) crystal is neither isotopically nor chemically pure, giving rise to an internal radiation background from the detector material (Lorusso et al., 2016). This internal radiation arises from the primordial isotope 138La (T1/2=1.02×109 years (Bé et al., 2016)), present with an isotopic abundance of 0.090 (1)%. Lanthanum-138 decays by β- emission (Ibeta=35%) to the yrast spin/parity Iπ=2+ state in 138Ce which is followed by the emission of a 788.7 keV gamma ray. The 138La isotope can also decay by electron capture (Iec=65% branch) to the Iπ=2+ state in 138Ba, followed by a 1435.8 keV gamma ray emission
The variability in the linearity of the energy response across the diﬀerent LaBr3(Ce) detectors in NANA means that the energy calibra- tion procedure of the LaBr3(Ce) detectors can be more complex than for standard HPGe detectors (for which often a simple linear or quadratic calibration response function will provide good gain match- ing over an energy range 50 keV–2 MeV). The linearity of energy response for the eight detectors in the central ring of NANA was investigated using a thin VYNS mixed source with 13 prominent characteristic gamma emissions ranging from 60 keV from 241Am to the 1332 keV line of 60Co. The acquired singles spectrum for one of the detectors can be seen in Fig. 3. Peaks were ﬁtted to a Gaussian function with an nth-order polynomial background. The 1836 keV peak was not ﬁtted due to the interference from the quenched internal alpha emissions in this region of the spectrum. The calibrated response of the detectors can be seen in Figs. 4 and 5. The calibration was achieved using a 4th order polynomial. Diﬀerences in the response for the high energy 60Co emission (1332 keV) show less than 1% ﬂuctuation across the eight detectors.
During the energy response calibration procedure, the degree of linearity for the detectors was observed to vary across the suite of detectors. The typical range in response from detector to detector can be seen from Fig. 4, where Detector 0 exhibits a greater linearity than Detector 3, whilst operating at the same voltage (1300 V) from the CAEN HV supply unit supplying independent HV to each detector.
The combined energy resolution response of the 8 detectors in the NANA central ring is shown in Fig. 6. In general, the measured full- width half maximum (FWHM) energy resolution for the detectors
Fig. 3. Annotated 24 h channel spectrum identifying the characteristic gamma emis- sions associated with radionuclides present in the VYNS mixed source.
Fig. 4. Two detector energy calibration curves from NANA. The non-linear response of Detector 3 is more pronounced than Detector 0.
Fig. 5. The calibrated response of each detector for the 86400 s acquisition of the VYNS source. The fourth-order polynomial generally matches the responses, although due to the varying linearity across the detector array, and the diﬀerent gains across the PMTs operating at 1300 V, some anomalies are seen.
Fig. 6. Measured FWHM energy resolution response of the NANA array as a function of gamma-ray energy using well-resolved transitions from the VYNS source. The power-law ﬁt shows the expected near Poisson response.
follows the expected Poisson E1/2 dependence, with a measured value of 42 keV for the FWHM at 1332.5 keV.
2.2.Full-energy peak eﬃciency calibration of the NANA and comparison to Monte Carlo simulations
A full-energy peak detection eﬃciency measurement was deter- mined using the same dataset as used for the energy calibration. The determination of the area under the full-energy peaks of interest in the spectra from the mixed source was complicated by the convoluted and multiple component background continuum in the spectra. Seven ‘well- ﬁtted’ individual gamma-ray emissions from the VYNS mixed source were used in the ﬁnal full-energy peak absolute detection eﬃciency measurement. These gamma ray transitions used in the ﬁt were 59.5 keV (241Am); 122.1 keV (57Co); 165.9 keV (139Ce); 391.7 keV (113Sn); 661.7 keV (137Cs); 834.8 keV (54Mn); 1115.5 keV (65Zn)..
The spectrum of the VYNS mixed source acquired over 24 h shown in Fig. 3. Only the well-ﬁtted peaks were used in the eﬃciency calculation shown in Fig. 7.
A Monte Carlo simulation of the NANA array was constructed for comparison, with the centres of the detector front faces placed a distance 78 mm from the source, replicating the geometry of the experimental calibration measurement. A mono-energetic isotropic source was simulated and placed in the centre of NANA. The energy of the simulated emitted gamma source was increased across an energy
Fig. 7. Comparison of the simulated and measured full-energy peak (FEP) detection eﬃciency response for the NANA spectrometer. The Monte Carlo simulation for the absolute full-energy peak of the simulated values for the sum of the 8 annular detectors in the central ring shown using the blue line. The data from the VYNS source at a point source to detector-face distance of 78 mm are shown as the orange data points. Uncertainties in this plot are smaller than the data points. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
range from 40 keV to 2000 keV. In contrast to the measured spectra, the only contaminant to the simulated peak was the lead K X-ray contribution in the low energy peaks. A simulation of the full 12 detector conﬁguration was also performed, with the detectors also at 78 mm. This showed the expected 50% eﬃciency enhancement over the 8-element conﬁguration shown in Fig. 7.
The data from the calibration source validated the Monte Carlo simulation for the full-energy peak eﬃciency. For the annular ring, a FEP eﬃciency of 8.93 (11) % was measured at 122 keV (57Co) and 1.876 (23)% at 1115.5 keV (65Zn). These compared well with the simulated FEP eﬃciencies for the eight in the annular ring of 9.82 (5)% and 1.889 (20)% respectively.
3.Example of Gamma-ray coincidence selection with NANA
The identiﬁcation of ﬁssion products is crucial to nuclear security and public conﬁdence in nuclear waste assay. The potential value of gamma-ray coincidence measurements in this ﬁeld of measurement can be demonstrated using a test case of a mixed source of 134Cs/137Cs (Regan et al., 2016). The isotopic ratio of this element can be used as a tracer, as the yield of the two radionuclides varies dramatically according to the production technique. Caesium-137 is a long-lived radionuclide (T1/2 ~30 years) emitting one characteristic
661.6 keV gamma ray from a metastable state in 137mBa. A decay scheme of the shorter-lived isotope 134Cs, (T1/2=2.0652(4) y), is shown in Fig. 9.
A mixed Cs isotope radioactive source was prepared at NPL from two chemically pure samples of 134Cs and 137Cs. The source had an activity of approximately 8 kBq, comprising ~4 kBq each from the two caesium isotopes at time of measurement. The ampoule containing the mixed source was placed at the centre of the array using a 3D printed source holder and data acquired for 14,400 s across the 8 detectors in the central ring of NANA. The acquired list-mode output was analysed using bespoke analysis software and npp (nuclear physics project), part of the NPTool software package (Matta et al., 2016). These software packages produced a ROOT output ﬁle which could then be inter- rogated and manipulated in oﬄine analysis. From this, manipulations can be made to enhance the 134Cs decay emission lines and reduce the background produced by the internal radiation and ambient room radiation, as well as discrimination from the full-energy peak asso- ciated with the 137Cs decay and the Compton continuum.
To improve the peak-to-total in the singles spectra, a normalised fraction of the total internal background spectrum (shown in Fig. 2)
Fig. 8. Comparison of the raw (black) and background-subtracted (red) summed singles spectra for the mixed 134Cs/137Cs radioactive source taken using the 8 central detectors of NANA. Note the clear enhancement which allows the identiﬁcation of the weakly populated 1038 keV, 1168 keV and 1365 keV transitions in the background subtracted spectrum. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 9. Level scheme showing the states populated in the β- decay of the nuclear ﬁssion waste residue 134Cs.
was subtracted channel by channel from the acquired source spectra. The improvement in spectral clarity achieved using this background subtraction is demonstrated in Fig. 8, where the weakly populated emissions following the decay of the 134Cs, whose decay level scheme is shown in Fig. 9, are clearly evident.
3.1.Coincident measurements of caesium mixed isotope source
A coincidence time condition of Δt=25 ns was applied to the dataset. This oﬄine sorting software condition groups temporally correlated events measured in diﬀerent detectors which can be assumed to arise from the same radioactive decay event. This oﬄine gating condition also allows for higher dimension coincidence spectra to be produced for correlated higher multiplicity events.
For measured gamma-ray multiplicity greater than 1 events, the 137Cs full-energy peak is essentially removed. In order to pass this logical gating condition, a decay event must be coupled to a random coincident event, either from the internal LaBr3(Ce) detector back- ground or chance. By contrast, for 134Cs cascade full-energy peaks, the number of counts in the spectrum is only reduced by the ratio of the detection eﬃciency for one and two events.
The spectrum in Fig. 10 was produced by plotting the correlated energy pairs produced in multiplicity > 1 events on the x and y axis. The strongly populated cascades from the decay of 134Cs are clearly visible, while the 137Cs full energy peak is completely absent. Notably,
Fig. 10. The gamma-gamma energy coincidence matrix for multiplicity > 1 coincident events. Note the presence of the 569, 605 and 796 keV coincident peaks associated with the decay of 134Cs are evident in the matrix, as is the 1436 keV – La K X ray coincident peak associated with the electron capture decay branch of 138La. The 137Cs decay single gamma peak at 662 keV is not observed in this matrix above background.
Fig. 11. The gamma-ray coincidence multiplicity conditions applied to the mixed source 134Cs/137Cs data show clean discrimination of the 137Cs. The gated spectra of the mixed source shows a reduction in the random and Compton background whilst the double gated spectrum (bottom) exhibits an improved peak to total and selects the 569 keV, 605 keV, 796 keV cascade associated with the 134Cs decay. No background subtraction has been applied to any of these gated spectra.
the associated ridges for Compton scattered 137Cs decay events summing to 662 keV can still be identiﬁed, as can the 1436 keV internal radiation coincidences with lanthanum K X-rays following the electron capture decay branch of the 138La component of the detector material.
3.2.Energy gating to enhance P/T of the 134Cs cascade
Further separation of the 134Cs cascades can be achieved by applying energy gates on the full energy peaks. The Compton events with high multiplicity within the time window are removed from the spectrum by these gates. Selecting the triple gamma-ray cascade in the decay of 134Cs (569 keV, 796 keV and 605 keV), it can be seen that the Compton background is reduced (see Fig. 11) relative to the number of counts in the full-energy peak. A double energy gate of the 796 keV and 605 keV transitions shows very clean selection of only the 569 keV full- energy peak. This double gated spectrum, has a peak to total ratio approaching 40% for the 569 keV peak, which represents a factor of 4 improvement over the ungated total projection spectra.
4.Summary and conclusions
The NAtional Nuclear Array gamma-ray coincidence spectrometer has been commissioned at the National Physical Laboratory, UK.Gamma-ray energy calibrations using an NPL thin-ﬁlm reference
source show diﬀerent linearity response across the detectors. Full- energy peak eﬃciency calibration measurements were in good agree- ment with Monte Carlo simulations performed in NPTool. The application of coincident measurements using the NANA elements to select 134Cs from 137Cs in a mixed source highlighted the power to separate and identify cascade emitting nuclides in complex matrices. This particular method of selecting weakly populated lines in a mixed matrix source may be particularly useful to nuclear fuel waste assay, where clean one nuclide mixes rarely exist.
This work was supported by the UK Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) by grant number ST/L005743/1 and the National Measurement Oﬃce. RS acknowledges support from the NDA-NNL PhD student bursary program. The authors are grateful to the engineers at STFC Daresbury Laboratory, UK and Prof. John Simpson for help in the mechanical design and construction of the NANA holding frame structure.
