<title>Structural Analysis of Wendelstein 7-X Nonplanar Coil Type 1 in Self-Field Test Conditions</title>
<Affiliation>a.Yangzhou University, College of Mechanical Engineering, Yangzhou 225127, China
b.Chinese Academy of Sciences, Institute of Plasma Physics, Hefei 200031, China</Affiliation>
<author>Shanwen Zhang, Yuntao Song, Zhongwei Wang, Xuebing Peng, Jianfeng Zhang, Yongfa Qin, Linlin Tang & Qiang He</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1368334</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1368334</URL>
Abstract — The Wendelstein 7-X (W7-X), the largest modular stellarator in the world, is in operation at Max Planck Institute for Plasma Physics in Greifswald, Germany. The magnet system of the W7-X consists of 50 nonplanar and 20 planar superconducting coils, which are supported by a massive central support structure. All superconducting coils have been subjected to gravity and electromagnetic force due to the interaction between self-field and the coil current in the test conditions in Saclay, France. Each coil is equipped with a few mechanical sensors. Some of the sensors have indicated considerable deviation from the numerical prediction. The nonplanar coil Type 1 is an example of such deviations. This technical note presents structural analyses performed to verify the numerical modeling by checking the stresses in the measurement points. In order to find the reason from the finite element model, three factors are considered: mesh refinement, increasing the region of mesh refinement, and changing the element supports. The results  show that the  three factors have no impact on the stresses at the measurement points. Finally, special attention has been paid to the sensors during commissioning of the W7-X, which revealed that lack of information about boundary conditions or temperature fluctuations could be the reason for the original discrepancies.
Keywords — Wendelstein 7-X, nonplanar coil Type 1, structural analysis.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
The Wendelstein 7-X (W7-X), the largest modular stellarator in the world, is in operation at Max Planck Institute for Plasma Physics in Greifswald, Germany.1–4 The W7-X aims to provide a mature option for the fusion reactor.5 The stellarator has a complex five-fold sym- metric magnet system that  includes  50  nonplanar  and 20 planar superconducting coils, which are supported by  a massive central support structure.1,6,7 All superconduct- ing coils have been subjected to gravity and electromag- netic force due to the interaction between the self-field and coil current in the test conditions in Saclay, France Each coil is equipped with a few mechanical sensors.8 Some of the sensors have indicated considerable devia- tion from the numerical prediction. The nonplanar coil (NPC) Type 1 (NPC1) is an example of such deviations. This technical note presents structural analyses performed to verify the numerical modeling by check- ing the stresses in the measurement points for the NPC1. Three factors are considered in  five  cases: mesh refinement, increasing the region of mesh
refinement, and changing the element supports.
II.DETAIL OF THE NPC1
The winding pack (WP) of the NPC1 includes 12 layers of Nb-Ti cable-in-conduit conductors combined
in 6 double layers with nine windings  in  each  layer.  The superconducting strands are embedded in a square aluminum alloy jacket and are insulated from  each  other. The layers are also  insulated  from  each  other  and the  WP  is  isolated  by  ground  insulation.  The NPC casings made from stainless steel are filled with   the WP, which includes two half cases welded together. The glass sand, which is impregnated by a resin, fills      in the  space  between the NPC casing and the  WP and  is able to transmit the electromagnetic force from  the WP. The basic cross section of the  NPC  is  shown  in Fig. 1.
III.THE FINITE ELEMENT MODEL AND BOUNDARY CONDITION
To calculate the stress distribution of the NPC1, the structural analyses are carried out using ANSYS 14.5.  Due to the complex and large structure of the NPC1, the finite element (FE) model requires simplification, as shown in Fig. 2. The casing, glass sand, ground insula- tion, and WP are modelled by the Solid45. The Solid45 is used for three-dimensional (3-D) modeling of solid struc- tures. It is defined by eight nodes having 3 deg of transla- tional freedom at each node and can output the stress. The weld is ignored and two half casings are connected by merging them together. The connections between the casing, glass sand, ground insulation, and the WP are simulated by the Targe170 and the Conta173. The Targe170 and the Conta173 are used to represent contact and sliding between 3-D target surfaces and a deformable surface. The contact elements themselves overlay the solid elements describing the boundary of a deformable body. In the structural analyses, all of the contacts are rigid, in that they do not allow the relative motion Fig. 1. NPC basic cross section.
Fig. 2. FE model and boundary condition (case 1).
between the element faces. They also do not consider   the friction. In the simulation, the behavior of the contact surfaces is always bonded. The test supports are modeled by the Beam44. The Beam44 is a tapered, unsymmetrical elastic element with tension, compression, torsion, and bending capabilities. It has 6 deg of freedom at  each node: translations in the nodal x-, y-,  and  z-directions and rotations about the nodal x-, y-, and z-axes. The connections between the test supports and the casing are also simulated by the Targe170 and the Conta173. The behavior of the contact point–surface is always bonded.
The structural boundary condition is shown in Figs. 2 and 3. The end of the support is fixed. The coil current of
17.6 kA has been considered. The electromagnetic forces are extracted from the results of the electromagnetic analy- sis to apply on the WP nodes and the gravitational accelera- tion is applied on the whole model. The electromagnetic forces under the self-field test condition are calculated with the help of the specially developed magnetic field computa- tion code Electromagnetic Field, Force and Inductance9 (EFFI). The FE model includes  26  735  elements  and  24 350 nodes. Five cases are analyzed for checking the stresses of the four points as follows:
Case 1: Fixed three supports + electromagnetic forces + gravity + no mesh refinement
Case 2: Fixed three supports + electromagnetic forces + gravity + mesh refinement
Case 3: Fixed three supports + electromagnetic forces + gravity + increasing the region of mesh refinement (Fig. 9a)
Fig. 3. Electromagnetic loads (case 1).
Case 4: Fixed three supports + electromagnetic forces + gravity + increasing the region of mesh refinement (Fig. 9b)
Case 5: Fixed three  supports  +  electromagnetic forces + gravity + changing the element supports.
RESULTS
To solve the issue of mesh convergence, five differ- ent refined local areas of case 2 were built. After being calculated, the stresses of four points were obtained. As shown in Fig. 4, the stresses of points 1 and 2 increased as the node number increased. When the node numbers are 17 490 and 66 132, the stresses stay the same. So the node number of 17 490 is fine enough for the local model of case 2. As shown in Fig. 5, the stresses of points 3 and 4 increased as the node number increased. When the node numbers are 6630, 10 965, 45 560, and 166 090, the stresses stay the same. So the node number of 6630 is  fine enough for the local area of case 2. To keep the same mesh density with the local model for points 1 and 2, the node number of 45 560 was used in case 2.
The von Mises stresses calculated in the measurement points for case 1 and the test case stresses are shown in Table I. The measurement points, which were selected because they are in the plane position, are presented in Fig. 6. In the experimental results, the stresses of points 1 and 2 are at the range of 50 , 70 MPa, and the stresses of
Fig. 4. Stresses versus node number for points 1 and 2 (case 2).
Fig. 5. Stresses versus node number for points 3 and 4 (case 2).
points 3 and 4 are at the range of 120 , 150 MPa. The simulated results show that the simulation stresses of points 2, 3, and 4 are approximately half of the stresses of the test case results and the simulation stresses of point 1 are 32% of the test case results, while the boundary condition is the same as the test case. The test case also indicated consider- able deviation from the numerical prediction. The reason for the considerable deviation between the numerical pre- diction and measured values may be from the FE model. So, three factors are considered because they are related to the stresses: mesh refinement, increasing the region of mesh refinement, and changing the element supports.
V.THE IMPACT OF MESH REFINEMENT
As shown in Fig. 7, a new model was  built  with local remeshed element. The previous model had three layers in the thickness of the casing, while the new one has six layers. The element density of the local model
TABLE I
Simulation Results Versus  Test  Case Results
Fig. 6. Local stress distribution and measured  points (case 1).
also is larger than that of the previous model. The bonding contact between the cut faces is used to trans-  fer the force.
The structural analysis is performed and the stresses are compared with the previous results and testing values, as shown in Table I. The results show that the stresses of points 3 and 4 have very little change. For point 1, the simulation stresses increase 11% over the test case results. For point 2, the stress error is reduced by 23%. In a word, mesh refinement has little influence on the simulation stress of the four points. Figure 8 shows the stress distribution of two local models for case 2. Compared with Fig. 6, the mesh refinement makes the stress of the local area increase.
As shown in Fig. 9, two new models were built with large local area and two additional rows of elements in each direction. The structural analysis is performed and the stresses are compared with the previous results and mea- sured values, as shown in Table I. The results show that increasing the region of mesh refinement has no impact on the simulation stress of the four points. Figures 10 and 11 show the stress distribution of the two local models for cases 3 and 4. In Fig. 10, the area of high stress is dis- continuous at the contact area. However, Fig. 11 shows increasing the region of mesh refinement can make the discontinuous stress distribution become continuous.
VII.THE IMPACT OF CHANGING THE ELEMENT SUPPORTS
As shown in Fig. 12, a new model was built with Solid45 for the supports. The structural analysis is per- formed and the stresses are compared with the previous results, as shown in Table I. The results show that chan- ging the element supports has little impact on the simula- tion stress of the four points. Figure 13 shows the stress distribution of two local models for case 5. From Fig. 13, the stress of the support area near point 4 is reduced, but the support has no impact on the stress of point 4.
Fig. 7. Refined mesh model (case 2).
Fig. 8. Stress distribution of case 2.
Fig. 9.  Increasing the region of mesh refinement (a) case 3 and (b) case 4.
Fig. 10. Stress distribution of case 3.
VIII.DISCUSSION
From the stress results of the five cases, it is known that the three factors—mesh refinement, increasing the region of mesh refinement, and changing the element
supports—have no impact on the simulation results. In addition, mesh convergence is also considered and the suitable size of the mesh is used. The force inputs calcu- lated by the EFFI code are also a very important factor for the results of the model. Because the EFFI code is
Fig. 11. Stress distribution of case 4.
Fig. 12.  Different element types of the support (case 5).
Fig. 13. Stress distribution of case 5.
verified by a large number of examples, the code is obviously right and the electromagnetic loads have no problem. The reasons for why the FE model can be
excluded and other reasons should be checked.  From  Ref. 10, it is known that the test results  of  the  coil  group show, in general, good correlation with the
simulation results. Each coil is equipped with a few mechanical sensors. Some of the sensors indicated con- siderable deviation from the numerical prediction. Now several reasons from the FE model have been checked, and the most probable reason for the deviations between the test and simulation results is a lower friction between the lateral support bridge and its shoulders. It was found that there was something wrong with the sensor, so spe- cial attention should be paid to the sensors.
IX.SUMMARY
In this study, which considers three factors—mesh refinement, increasing the region of mesh  refinement, and changing the element supports—five FE models  were built  and five cases were calculated.  The results   of case 1 show that the simulation stresses of the four points are different from the test case results and there is considerable deviation between the numerical prediction and measured values. In order to find the reason  from  the FE model, three factors are considered in the four cases. However, all of them have no impact on the stresses at the measured points. Finally, special attention has been paid to the sensors during commissioning of    the W7-X, which revealed that lack of information about boundary conditions or temperature fluctuations  could  be the reason for the original discrepancies.
Acknowledgments
The authors appreciate the great collaboration and help from Victor Bykov and the W7-X team. The views and opi- nions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect those of the Max Planck Institute for Plasma Physics. The authors also acknowledge the support and funding from the Province Postdoctoral Foundation of Jiangsu (1501164B), the Technical Innovation Nurturing Foundation of Yangzhou University (2015CXJ016), and the China  Postdoctoral  Science Foundation (2016M600447).
