<title>Treatment and disposal of spent radioactive ion-exchange resins produced in the nuclear industry</title>
<author>Jianlong Wang, Zhong Wan</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Laboratory of Environmental Technology, INET, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
b.Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety, Ministry of Education, INET, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2014.08.003 </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2014.08.003 </URL>
a b s t r a c t
Ion exchange resins are employed extensively in the nuclear industry to remove the radioactive con- taminants such as neutron activation products and ﬁssion products which may have leaked from fuel elements. The spent radioactive ion exchange resins have been produced during the operation of the nuclear facilities in the nuclear industry. The resins loaded with radioactive nuclides could not be re- generated and reused. These waste resins should be properly treated and disposed in order to minimize their potential hazard to the environments. In this paper, different technologies used for the treatment and disposal of spent radioactive resins were summarized and compared, including immobilization (such as cementation, bituminization and plastic solidiﬁcation), advanced oxidation processes (such as incin- eration, pyrolysis, acid boiling degradation, the Fenton or Fenton-like reaction, supercritical water oxidation and plasma technology) and super compaction. Some supplementary methods, such as acid stripping, microbial conversion treatment and high integrity container were also mentioned. The prin- ciple of treatment methods, their characteristics and applications were brieﬂy introduced, the future research directions were discussed.
Keywords:
Spent radioactive resin   Immobilization   Advanced oxidation processes   Radionuclides
1.Introduction
Along with the rapid development of nuclear industry, more and more radioactive wastes have been produced. Low-level radioactive spent resins comprise the major fraction of low and intermediate level radioactive wastes. Such spent resins constitute a major pro- portion (in terms of volume) of the solid radioactive wastes generated by the nuclear industry. The treatment and disposal of the spent radioactive resins have become an urgent problem in the development of nuclear power plants.
As usual, spent ion-exchange resins (IERs) will be released during the operation of nuclear facility, including the recycle of nuclear fuels, demineralization of the wastewater of nuclear power plant, decontamination of nuclear installation, decommissioning of nuclear facility and so on. Spent IERs are one of the most important radioactive low-level wastes (LLW) which loaded by strontium-90, cobalt-60, caesium-137, uranium-235, uranium-238 and so on.
As the development of environmental-friendly society as well as the address to the problem caused by fossil fuel, nuclear power as a kind of clean energy is developing rapidly. According to the World Nuclear Association (2014), the world combined  capacity  of 374,348 MW was achieved by April 2014. That equals to 374 nuclear power units of 1000 MWe. The volume nuclear wastes were about 224,400 m3. In China, by 2020 there will be 41 nuclear reactors in operation, with a total nuclear power installed capacity of 0.7 billion kilowatts, which will produce solid  wastes  about 3150e4900 m3/a (Wang, 2012). The ratio of waste resins is about
0.04  that  is  126e196  m3/a.  For  example,  two  units  in  Daya Bay
Nuclear Power Plant in China produced resins about 2.5e13 m3/a. From 1994 to 2002, the amount of waste resins and solid wastes in Daya Bay Nuclear Power Plant is 62.6 m3 and 1563 m3, respectively (Huang et al., 2004).
Therefore the proper precautions have to be taken for the treatment and disposal of radioactive wastes to guarantee the sustainable development of the nuclear industry and to protect ecological environment and human health.
2.Principles and applications of ion-exchange resins in the nuclear industry
2.1.Principles of the ion exchange process
Ion exchange is a process in which cations and anions dissolved in an electrolytic solution are interchanged with counter ions in a solid phase. Counter ions exchange on a stoichiometrically equiv- alent basis with dissolved ions of the same sign and charge. The structure of the solid phase ion exchanger is not permanently altered and the process is reversible (through regeneration) as demonstrated by the following typical exchange reactions.
Cation exchange:
2HR þ 90Sr2þ#SrR2 þ 2Hþ	(1)
Anion exchange:
2RCl þ SO2—#R2SO4 þ 2Cl—	(2)
where R represents the insoluble matrix of the exchanger. Equation
(1) describes the removal of strontium-90 from a waste stream by cation exchange; Equation (2) describes the removal of sulfate by anion exchange.
2.2.Ion exchange applications in the nuclear industry
Light water reactor (LWR) utilizes water for cooling and neutron moderation. Dissolved ionic species present in this water can lead to increased corrosion, higher radiation doses due to activation products and reduced neutron economy from uncontrolled neutron capture reactions. To alleviate these potential problems, ion ex- change resins have been used:
(1)To provide demineralized make-up water.
(2)To remove radioactive contaminants such as neutron acti- vation products and ﬁssion products which may have leaked from fuel elements.
(3)To reduce levels of oxygen in coolant.
(4)To control levels of additives including corrosion inhibitors, neutron poisons and the like.
In order to maximize effective surface area, resins are produced in both bead form and in powdered form. Powdered resin can have as much as 100 times more surface area than the equivalent weight of bead resin.
Bead resin is generally used in columns and ionic solutions are passed through these columns for puriﬁcation. Resin columns can be set up as individual cation or anion resin columns (either alone or in series), or as a homogenous mixture of both resin types in a single column (mixed bed). Bead resins have the advantage of being easily regenerated. Regeneration of exhausted resins can be accomplished by introducing a ﬂow of an acid solution for cation resins, and an alkali solution for anion resins, which displace the exchanged ions and replace them with fresh counter ions. Mixed bed resin columns are more difﬁcult to regenerate than individual cation or anion resin bed columns.
3.Source and properties of radioactive ion-exchange resin
IER used in the nuclear industry is a kind of macromolecular copolymer based on styrene monomer and is cross-linked by divinylbenzene, as shown in Fig. 1.
IERs can be damaged by chemical deteriorations, for example, diminution of ion exchange capacity, treatment among high
Fig. 1. Structure of sulfonated polystyrene cation exchange resin crosslinked with divinylbenzene.
temperature and irradiation, and unwanted species adsorption. Several physical deteriorations, such as mechanical destruction and serious scaling in the system, also contribute to the damage of resins. All of these can destroy the covalent bond and increase the matrix of the resin. The regeneration of spent resins will produce lots of radioactive liquid wastes and the operation is so complicated that spent resins always be directly replaced rather than reused.
The decrease of permeability, selectivity and capability of resins are limitations to some disposal methods. Additionally, some characteristics of resin itself (e.g. ignitibility, dispersivity, high speciﬁc activity, easily swelling, containing N, S elements) bring difﬁculties to disposal. Moreover, ion exchange resins are easily powdered and hardened, which can plug the pipe. So, the devel- opment of suitable treatment methods for spent resins should be a priority.
4.Methods used for treatment and disposal of spent resins
4.1.Solidiﬁcation
The wastes are encapsulated in an inert material such as cement, asphalt and plastic, forming integral geometries during the process of solidiﬁcation, and then transported to disposal plant for storage ﬁnally. This technology is widely used for solidiﬁcation of spent radioactive resins in many countries (e.g. French, Japan, Germany, Finland and China).
4.1.1.Cementation
Cement is a proper material for resins solidiﬁcation due to its good physical, chemical and mechanical properties (Li and Wang, 2006). When we use cement to solidify the spent resins, water, wastes and various adsorbents were added. Some hydration products, such as hydrated calcium silicate, hydrated calcium aluminate and hydrated calcium ferrite, can adsorb and encapsu- late or react with the radionuclides to form heterogeneous and a certain strength solidiﬁcation ﬁnal products. There are three mechanisms involved in the cementation process: (a) matrix adsorption; (b) chemical ﬁxation and (c) mechanical seals (Fig. 2). The cost of cementation is usually low and the operation is relatively simple. There is no need of high pressure and high tem- perature in the process and no risk of ﬂaming, blasting and irra- diating. Solidiﬁcation products have good thermal stability and can almost encapsulate all kinds of radionuclides. Therefore, cement is
widely used in comparison with other inert materials.
However, there is force existing between the packing material and dehydration resins, and the resin will swell or shrink when
Fig. 2. Resins solidiﬁed in the cement (Li and Wang, 2006).
adsorb or release water. The ﬁnal waste form is much larger than original resins and some radioactive nuclides may be leached into contacting water (Ple´cas et al., 1995). From 1994 to 2002, Daya Bay Nuclear Power Plant in China treated 62.6 m3 spent radioactive resins by cementation. However, the ﬁnal packed cementation products were totally 378 m3. The volume is 6 times larger than the original resins before cementation (Huang et al., 2004).
Cementation has been studied since 1950s. In the early 1980s, Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) in United States examined the properties of cementitious forms with ion exchange resins, including compressive strength, leaching rate and irradiation sta- bility. The impacts of resin type, cement type, resin loading, ratio of waste to cement and ratio of water to cement were also studied (Arnold et al., 1982). In the late 1980s, it was found that adding some volcanic ash into cement can improve the loading of resins. By adding 6% silica fume, the compressive strength and the stability of ﬁnal product can be improved, and the leakage rate of nuclides can be decreased.
Nishi et al. (1992) studied the Cs adsorption behavior by active silica. With its addition to mixture containing 134Cs loaded ion exchange resin, the leaching ratio of Cs was reduced to 1/10 as in the case of without active silica. Matsuda et al. (1992) studied the waste forms deterioration mechanism in water and the preventive measurement. They found that addition of 10 wt% steel ﬁber doubled the tensile strength of cement and the resin content increased from 20 to 42 vol%. Dyer and Morgan (1999) used poly- mer to modify cements to incorporate anion exchange resins, they examined the compressive strength, underwater and irradiation
stability and leaching rate. Plecas and Dimovi´c (2006) investigated the leaching characteristic of 137Cs and 60Co and the compressive strength improvement by adding natural sorbents (bentonite and clinoptilolite). Ye and Wang (1983) studied the immobilization of spent resins by slag cement, they determined that the mass ratio of resin to cement, water to cement and sodium hydroxide to cement was 0.55, 0.4 and 0.0015, respectively. The compressive strength of the ﬁnal solidiﬁed wastes was more than 7.35 MPa, and the other characteristics of ﬁnal products can meet the engineering demands. Our research group began to study the solidiﬁcation of spent radioactive resin from 1980s. Zhou et al. (2002) ﬁrstly applied sulfoaluminate cement (SAC) which is a new kind of cement to solidify the spent resins. The results showed that the compressive strength of products increased to 20 ± 2 MPa. The cementitious form presented a good matrix stability and low radionuclide leaching rate when the resin content varied from 42% to 48%. Li et al. (2005) investigated the effect of addition of zeolite on the strength of the cementation matrix. We found that the addition of 7% zeolite could solve the early thermal cracks problem, and in- crease the resin content and reduce the leaching rate of radionu- clides. We also studied the effect of zeolite on solidiﬁcation of spent borate radioactive resins using SAC and evaluated the compressive strength, leachability and mineral phase of solidiﬁed waste forms
(Sun and Wang, 2010; Sun et al., 2011a,b, 2014).
The operational procedure of immobilization with cement is not complicated. However, as usual, the volume of ﬁnal solidiﬁed waste form increased too much so that the cost of transportation and disposal is high. Therefore, the future research direction of cement immobilization should mainly focus on the reduction of porosity, optimization of cement type and additive type to increase resin loading in the matrix, enhancement of compressive strength and reduction of the leaching rate of nuclides.
4.1.2.Bituminization
During the process of bituminization, radioactive wastes and bitumen are mixed together at high temperature to carry out saponiﬁcation reaction. Finally, the wastes were encapsulated in bitumen and the solidiﬁed forms were formed. It included three procedures: (a) the pretreatment of solid wastes, (b) mixture  at high temperature, and (c) the treatment of secondary waste gas.
The solidiﬁed forms with bitumen display good performance, such as low porosity, low radionuclides leaching rate, high resin loading (the ratio of resin to bitumen is 1e1/2), resistance to chemical substances and microorganisms, and having smaller volume increase than cementation. However, the pretreatment of wastes, for example, freezing, melting and centrifugal dehydration under high temperature would increase the expense of disposal, the complexity of operation and the possibility of decomposition or ﬂame of the resins. Moreover there are lots of waste gas which need to be treated. Therefore, the temperature should be controlled reasonably to avoid dangerous situation. In 1981, a ﬁre happened in a bituminization workshop in a chemical company in Europe. Luckily, there was no serious consequence thanks to the ﬁre brigade. In 1997, bituminization demonstration facility blasted in a reprocessing plant located in Tokaimura, northeast of Tokyo, which led to some radioactive wastes releasing into the atmosphere.
From 1963, Saint-Gobain new technology company (SGN) in French began to study the continuous bituminization process and developed the ﬁlm evaporator bituminization system. It achieved volume reduction by evaporation at the same time. Teollisuuden Voima Oy (TVO) Company in Finland chose bitumen as an agent for immobilization of wet wastes at Olkiluoto Power Plant (Aalto and Valkiainen, 2001). They also investigated the properties of bitu- minized waste forms from Olkiluoto Power Plant. Westsik (1984) studied the immobilization of incinerator ash using cement and bitumen. The results showed that the compressive strength in bitumen and cement was 0.089 MPa and 9.655 MPa, respectively, and the leachability index was 13 and 7, respectively. Naskar et al. (2010) used the modiﬁed bitumen blending with  waste  plastic, they investigated the effect of different plastic contents on thermal stability and the performance of modiﬁed bituminous binders.
From 1960s, the researchers in China Institute of Atomic Energy (CIAE) began to investigate the immobilization of waste liquid containing sodium nitrate using bitumen, they designed mixing evaporation process including pre-concentration in evaporation and double screw machine of 3 m long evaporation. In 1985, they processed the thermal operation successfully for the ﬁrst time. In 2005, they ﬁrstly used bituminization to treat the residue liquid after evaporation treatment of low-level liquid waste for com- mercial application.
Although bituminization has high resin loading and low leach- ing rate, some risk factors, such as high temperature and ﬂam- mable, limit the use of bitumen as immobilization agent.
4.1.3.Plastic solidiﬁcation
During the process of plastic solidiﬁcation, polyethylene was incorporated into radioactive wastes, with addition of initiating agent, catalyst, accelerant and hardening agent. The mixture was stirred sufﬁciently and heated at same time. Through polymeriza- tion reaction, the wastes were encapsulated into the polyethylene and formed a stabile solidiﬁed form with certain intensity.
Plastic solidiﬁcation can be divided into thermosetting plastic solidiﬁcation and thermoplastic plastic solidiﬁcation. The former is physical reaction, that is, saponiﬁcation happened at high tem- perature and encapsulating the wastes into the plastic, which is similar to bituminization. The latter mainly include polymerization reaction at ambient or heating, which is similar to cementation, containing physical and chemical reactions.
The materials widely used today for plastic solidiﬁcation include urea formaldehyde, polyethylene, polyvinyl chloride, polyvinyl benzene, polyphenylene ethylene, polyester, epoxy resin, polymer incorporated in concrete, etc.
Compared with cementation, plastic solidiﬁcation needs dehy- dration or grinding. And the operation of process and facilities are complex. However, the resin loading is high so that the expense of transportation and disposal is lower than cementation. The leach- ing rate of solidiﬁed form by plastic is smaller than cement, but the aging resistance and chemical stability are inferior to cement. Compared with bituminization, thermal stability and mechanical performance are superior.
In 1974, researchers in Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute (JAERI) investigated the performance of polyethylene products burdened with radioactive resins (Moriyama et al., 1975). The result showed that with addition of 50% resin or withstanding irradiation to doses of 109 rad, there was no change in mechanical strength. The leaching rate of 137Cs was 1/500e1/1000 of the corresponding values on cement products. The plastic products had no deforma- tion after immersion in water or heating, unlike bitumen products. There was no volume increase as in the case of cementation. Re- searchers in Atomic Energy Research Establishment (AERE) in En- gland used waste polyvinyl chloride and polyethylene as the material to solidify the spent resins, which can decrease the cost of immobilization. The Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) in the United States investigated the performance of polyvinyl chloride and polyethylene as inert materials to mix with the spent resins melting at 398 K. The resin loading accounted for 50% of total volume.
In 1970s, researchers in Nuclear Research Center in Grenoble located in French studied to use polyester as an agent to solidify ion-exchange resins. In 1980s, the Technicatom Nuclear
Engineering Company in French used epoxy resin to solidify wastes, such as spent resins, concentrated solution, and chemical mud, which have been used in commercial scale. But the cost of epoxy resin was high and the process was more complicated than polyester.
In the 1970s and 1980s, researchers in Institute of Radiation Protection in China investigated the performance of the solidiﬁed waste form using urea-formaldehyde resin and unsaturated poly- ester blending with spent resins, respectively. The results showed that the solidiﬁed waste form with urea-formaldehyde resin was unstable, and the leaked acidic water can cause corrosion to container. So it is difﬁcult to promote the application of urea- formaldehyde resin.
In 1983, researchers in China Institute of Atomic Energy (CIAE) mixed the spent resins with divinylbenzene and  polystyrene  at 303 K, using sorbitan monooleate as emulsifying agent and azo-iso- butyronitrile as initiating agent. The solidiﬁed form displayed good thermal resistance and leaching resistance except its high price and strict operation conditions.
Gong et al. (1991) studied the performance of the solidiﬁed form using commercially available 191# unsaturated polyester blending with simulated resin containing 90Sr and 137Cs. Fan et al. (1994) found that it was feasible to use 196# unsaturated polyester as immobilization agent to solidify the spent resins. The waste form displayed good heat-resistance, irradiation-resistance, and freeze- ethaw resistance. Nuclides cumulative leaching rate was obviously lower than that using phenylethylene as solidiﬁcation agent.
Therefore, it is very important to choose proper inert material when using plastic immobilization. The high cost of epoxy resin and corrosivity of urea resin limit their commercial application.
4.2.Oxidative decomposition
Oxidative decomposition is a kind of treatment method for the resins before solidiﬁcation, which can reduce the risk in following progress, such as decreasing the concentration of organic to reduce the ﬂammable possibility, decreasing the concentration of organic acids to reduce the corrosion to container and changing the particle to inorganic residue or liquid to be easily treated. What is more, the transuranium and transplutonium can be recovered from the residue.
4.2.1.Dry oxidation
Incineration and pyrolysis are two kinds of volume reduction method belonging to dry oxidation, which were developed in the 1950s.
4.2.1.1.Incineration. Most organic wastes are transferred into inorganic ash, and 80e95% of radioactive nuclides are retained in the ash through incineration. Incineration can meet the require- ment of volume reduction and weight reduction. From 1981  to 1997, an Atomique Research Center at Cadatache in France incin- erated 500 m3 of oil and solvent, which produced 7500 kg of ash, which were immobilized in cement ﬁnally, and the ﬁnal waste form was 22,000 L (Luca et al., 2012). The volume reduction rate was 23. Taiwan incorporated incineration ash into bitumen, and the volume reduction rate was 20.
However, the factors such as resin dehydration before inciner- ation, incomplete burning, reprocessed off-gas containing radio- active nuclide, SOx and NOx and the risk of inhalation of incineration residue, all these limit the use of incineration. This method has high requirement on facilities. For example, the facil- ities are always equipped with the steel shell and refractory ceramic inside. The facilities of treatment of off-gas are equipped with
corrosion resistance material, for example, ﬁberglass, nickelic and titaniumtim.
In 1990s, the Institute of Radiation Protection in China per- formed the study of incineration. Kinoshita et al. (1991) examined the behavior of decomposition of resin and veriﬁed the feasibility of resins incineration using copper oxide as catalyst. Dubois et al. (1995) studied the difference of volatile  products  between   cationic and anionic exchanger resins. The result showed that the resins were  completely  decomposed  through  incineration  at  1073 K, while there were macromolecular organic products  through pyrolysis. Both technologies induce the hazardous prod- ucts which could cause air pollution.
In the United States, ﬂuidized bed incineration and slagging calcination have been widely used. Bortnikova et al. (2008) inves- tigated the performance of powdered metallized fuel for thermo- chemical treatment of spent resins and the physical and chemical properties of magnesium phosphate ceramic including ﬁnal residue slag.4.2.1.2.Pyrolysis. The temperature of pyrolysis is 502e752 ○C. During this process, the wastes were broken up into new gases, liquid, and solid under oxygen free or oxygen-deﬁcient conditions for its thermal instability. This process can offer high volume reduction and most of radioactive nuclides are limited in the res-idue products which can simplify the following immobilization process. However, the carbon and sulfate deposits in the residue can destroy the performance of pyrolysis facility and the stability of ﬁnal waste form. Studsvik Plant used thermal organic reduction method (THORsm) to treat 7000 m3 of spent resins at Tennessee in the United States, the radionuclides and inorganic material were retained in solid form.
Direct pyrolysis and oxidative pyrolysis are two forms of py- rolysis. During the process of former one, the spent resins are heated up without air supply, then the residue slag is oxidized  before immobilization. But this process needs to be equipped with another exhaust gas disposal facility for oxidation. The latter one allows the spent resins partly burning with small part of air supply which can reduce the potential explosion of reaction in the following incineration. Chun et al. (1998) found that oxidative py- rolysis can offer better volume reduction than direct pyrolysis. The volatile remains are associated with cross-linked structure of resin, resin type and temperature.
Matsuda et al. (1987) carried out the pyrolysis of cationic resins and anionic resins. They found that anionic resins got larger weight loss rate than cationic resin, because the functional sulfonic acid group was converted into disulﬁde bonds and sulfonyl embedded between base polymers, which make the polymers more stable and more difﬁcult to decompose.
Antonetti et al. (2000) studied the content of C, S, Co and Cs elements in the residue of pyrolysis, which was used for treating cationic resin loaded or unloaded Co and Cs. They found that 400 ○C seemed to be a limit beyond which it is impossible to guarantee  that Co and Cs were remained in the solid residue.
Juang and Lee (2002) found that cationic resins were harder to be decomposed and the residue was less volatile than anionic resins. There were SO2, CO2, CO, and H2O in the off-gas of cationic resin and trimethylamine, CO2, CO, and ethyl formate in the off-gas of anionic resin. In addition, catalyst such as CuSO4$5H2O, CuO and FeSO4$7H2O, which were loaded in cationic resins performed a better effect on decomposition.
The high temperature dry oxidation decreases the possibility of ignition and ferment rotting. It not only reduces the cost of trans- portation, storage, and disposal but also has little limitation on storage and disposal sites. What is more, it is possible for recovering ﬁssile material of plutonium and uranium. However, this method will induce secondary pollution gas which can increase the difﬁ- culties of following treatment.
4.2.2.Wet oxidation
Wet oxidation includes H2SO4eHNO3/H2O2 boiling degradation, H2SO4/HNO3eH2O2 boiling degradation, H2O2-transition metals (Fenton or Fenton-like process) degradation, supercritical water oxidation, plasma technology and so on.
The condition of wet oxidation is mild, simple, and the cost of oxidant is cheap. The liquid residue contains almost all the nuclides and the volume of ﬁnal waste form after immobilized can be reduced by 30e40%. There is no secondary pollution compared the dry oxidation. However, there are lots of limitations for facility and process, for example, the destruction of corrosive residue to material.
4.2.2.1.H2SO4eHNO3/H2O2 boiling degradation. The mixture of boiling H2SO4 and HNO3 or boiling H2SO4 and H2O2 with spent resins will react at 200○Ce260 ○C. During this process, H2O2 and HNO3 are the oxidizing agents, H2SO4 as an oxidant has an effect on carbonizing organic and elevates the temperature of system. The reactions of organic-carbon with H2O2 and HNO3 can be assuming in the following reactions (3) and (4) (Kobayashi et al., 1980).
@3
@4
No pollution gas will be induced, and almost 99% of plutonium was converted into plutonium sulfate in the inorganic residue. The oxidant can be recovered and reused.
Kobayashi et al. (1980) found that the temperature of H2SO4eH2O2 system was lower, and the requirement of catalyst was less than H2SO4eHNO3 system. No nitric oxide was induced from H2SO4eH2O2 system. However, the use of H2SO4 can induce a new liquid wastes which make the ﬁnal treatment complicated.
4.2.2.2.H2SO4/HNO3eH2O2 boiling degradation. The principle of H2SO4/HNO3eH2O2 boiling degradation is Fenton process essen- tially. Fenton process is a kind of advanced oxidation process which have been used to treat refractory organic pollutants. It is mainly based on the production of hydroxyl radicals (HO$, reaction (5)), which can lead to a series of chain reaction (reactions (6)e(10)). The organics can react with hydroxyl radicals (HO$) and peroxide rad- icals (HOO$). At last, the organics can be decomposed into low molecular organics.
@5
@6
@7
@8
@9
@10
In the 1970s and 1980s, Savannah River Laboratory (SRL) in the United States began to use HNO3eFe2þ/Fe3þeH2O2 system to oxidize  strong  acidic  phenylethylene  ion  exchange  resins. Bibler
and Orebaugh (1976) used dilute Fe2þeH2O2 solutions to decom- pose cationic ion-exchange resins. The result showed that  the resins could be completely dissolved with addition of solution mixed with 6% H2O2, 0.001 M Fe2þ/Fe3þ and 0.1 M HNO3 at 80 ○C in about 1 h. They found that it was effective when Fe2þ or Fe3þ was attached to the surface or inner of resins. The more cross-linkage degree or acidity was, the longer time dissolution  would  need. The remaining residue accounted for 92 wt% of the initial resins.
Lee (1981) veriﬁed that 40 vol% resins were dissolved sufﬁ- ciently with solution containing 0.1 M HNO3, 0.001 M Fe3þ and 3% H2O2. He examined the effect of different factors on dissolution rate, including temperature, hydrogen peroxide addition rate, slurry concentration, air sparging rate, batch size, cobalt-60 irra- diation and DTPA concentration. However, the ﬁnal treatment of the residue organic liquid was not involved.
Kubota (1983) reported that 4 g dried H-cationic resin could be completely dissolved into CO2 with 60 mL 30% H2O2. The results also showed that addition of catalyst was more efﬁcient than addition of oxidant on dissolution time. The increase of HNO3 concentration decreased the decomposition time.
4.2.2.3.H2O2-transition metals (Fenton or Fenton-like process) degradation. The theory of Fenton or Fenton-like reaction is based on the production of OH$ radical, which can initiate a series of chain reaction by H2O2 and catalyst (transition metals). OH$ radical reacts with peroxide and peroxy acid containing peroxide chain, and the organic wastes are decomposed into smaller molecule organics (Wang and Xu, 2012). The catalysts are cheap and non-poisonous, and oxidant is friendly to the environment. The reactions can be represented as follows.
@11
@12
@13
The mechanism is mainly owing to catalytic oxidations. This mechanism is very important in many catalytic reactions. It has been supposed as a core step in many chemical processes.
In the 1970s and 1980s, Savannah River Laboratory (SRL) in the United States and Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Center in German began to study the wet oxidation. In 1980s, Gasoline Corporation in Japan began to study the oxidation of spent resins with H2O2, and they constructed the advanced system for treating spent resins and other organic wastes (Todo et al., 1995). Oak Ridge National Labo- ratory (ORNL) was supported by Department of Energy (DOE) to conduct the wet oxidation of spent resins (Rogers and Dooge, 1996; Taylor, 2002).
In 1989, the Institute of Nuclear Power in Japan found that the mixture of iron and copper as catalyst was efﬁcient in oxidation of equal amounts of cationic resins and anionic resins using H2O2.
In 1990s, Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) in England veriﬁed the efﬁcient catalyst for cationic resins and anionic resins was FeSO4, mixture of FeSO4 and CuSO4, respectively. They immo- bilized the evaporating liquid of residue and the ﬁnal waste form was 1/5 of the original resins.
Zahorodna et al. (2007, 2008) analyzed the impact factors, such as concentrations of Fe2þ and H2O2 and temperature on dissolution time and mineralization. The results showed that the initial con- centration of catalyst had signiﬁcant inﬂuence on dissolution rate and mineralization compared with other factors. It was most efﬁ- cient when the catalyst was bound to the resin surface. They also veriﬁed that Fenton-reaction happened on the resin surface and in solution are different. They explored the mechanism of Fe2þ and Fe3þ as catalyst.
Gunale et al. (2009) chose CuSO4 as catalyst to dissolve the resins at 95 ○C and then carried out the second wet oxidation under condition of high temperature and pressure to mineralization. They found that oxalic acid was intermediate. Using iron as catalyst would prolong the reaction time and its consumption was more than copper. After the second wet oxidation process, decomposi- tion rate of the organic wastes was 99%.
In China, our group has carried out many experiments on wet oxidation since 1990s. For example, Geng (1993)  veriﬁed  the feasibility of resin decomposition using Fenton-like reagent and evaluated the factors of  H2O2eFe2þ/Cu2þeIER  system.  However, there was solid in the ﬁnal residue which is not suitable for the following immobilization. Jian et al. (1996) carried out the similar experiment. The results showed that iron and copper were the effective catalyst for cationic resin and anionic  resin,  respectively.  The mixture of iron and copper  were  efﬁcient  for  mixed  resins. What is more, they found the maximum COD value for further cementation.
4.2.2.4.Supercritical water oxidation (SCWO). This method makes water have higher solubility, fast mass and heat transfer rate, low viscosity and high diffusion coefﬁcient (Kim et al., 2010), which can miscible with oxygen and almost all organic materials at T ≤ 374 ○C, PC > 22.1 MPa. It forms a homogeneous reaction medium and the organic material can be decomposed in short time for its high mass transfer rate. The whole process can be displayed in the following reactions (Wang, 2006).@14
@15
During this process, there is almost no NOx induced and do not need secondary treatment system. The use of energy is low and the size of equipment is relatively small. However, the cost of equip- ment is high because this process may cause corrosion to the equipment under high temperature and high pressure. And the salt sediment can block the pipes. Both of them are the bottleneck for  its commercial application. In 1994, the United States constructed the ﬁrst commercial SCWO plant, while it was stopped working in 1999. From 1999, some countries, such as Sweden, Japan, England and Korea, began to construct the SCWO plant.
Worl et al. (2000) used 30% H2O2 as oxidant to treat the organic wastes containing plutonium and americium  at  46.2  MPa  and 540 ○C. The results showed that more than 99.9% organic wastes were converted into CO2 and H2O. Leybros et al. (2010) used iso- propanol as a co-fuel to accelerate the decomposition rate of spent resins at 30 MPa and 500 ○C. The decomposition rate was 99%. They also evaluated the effect of IERs feed concentration, nature of IERs and counter ions. Kim et al. (2010) carried out the decomposition of spent resins at 24.8 MPa and 360 ○C with addition of 0.615% of sodium hydroxide solution. The liquid residue was 80e185 mg/L of COD, and the corrosive elements were less than 1 mg/L. There were 3 mg/L of SOx and no NOx produced. The Institute of Nuclear Energy Research (INER) in Taiwan used SCWO system to treat organic liquid, and evaluated the impacting factors on decomposition (Institute of Nuclear Energy Research, 2011). Huang et al. (2000) treated the Co-exchanged cationic resins with 30%  H2O2  as oxidant at 23.8 MPa and 500 ○C. The volume reduction was more than 99%, and 95% of Co nuclide was retained in the slag. Xu et al. (2010) designed the TWM reactor combined transpiring wall  reactor and Modar reactor for reducing the sediment to block the pipe and decreasing the corrosion to the reactor. This system was the core facility of pilot-scale plant which uses SCWO method.
The research directions of this method are facility design and material development for decreasing the corrosion to the equip- ment and reducing the salt deposition on the surface.
4.2.2.5. Plasma technology. Plasma is an aggregation of ionized gas containing electron, ion, neutral particles and physically active and chemically reactive state particles. For example, O2 transfer into free radical and then react with the organics.
@16
@17
Plasma technology decomposes the waste by thermal equilib- rium without combustion, and the organic wastes are heated up to higher temperature, usually higher than 1500 ○C. The organics are
decomposed into CO2, CO, H2O, SOx, and NOx. And then the residues containing radioactive and metallic oxide are vitriﬁed in glass for the ﬁnal disposal. These two processes achieve the volume reduc-
tion and ﬁx of radioactive nuclides. There is no need of auxiliary fuels, and the volume of waste gas is small so that the facilities can be small.
This method has been widely used in volume reduction of low- level radioactive wastes. The United States and Russia have carried out the deep research on treatment of radioactive wastes. Under the support of Department of Energy (DOE) in the United States, plasma centrifugal treatment (PACT™) made by Retech Company and plasma enhance melting pot (PEMR) made by IET Company are the representative methods. The former has been widely used in US and Germany. Russia has designed Plasma gasifying melting system (PGM).
The ﬁrst application of plasma technology in China was to treat chemical weapons. From 1990s, this technology began to turn to civil use. In 1994, INER in Taiwan began to design the plasma facility for low-level radioactive waste treatment, and the systems are ignited by the home-made 100 kW non-transferred plasma torches (INER-100NT). The ﬁnal glassy or ceramic slags are high quality, the compressive strength is high and the leaching rate is low (Tzeng et al., 1998). Hu et al. (2007) studied the treatment of chemical weapons using plasma technology.
Comparisons of different kinds of wet oxidation processes are listed in Table 1.
4.3.High integrity container
High integrity container (HIC) is a kind of packing container which made up of special material and can be used for more than 300 years. It is widely believed that the radioactive waste can decay to a safety level after 300 years. HIC has been widely used since 1970s. It has chemical and thermal stability, high strength and excellent hermetic seal, different from concrete drum and stainless steel drum. Spent resins are dehydrated by centrifugal, pressure or vacuum ﬁltration and heat, and then the resins were packed into HIC and desolated with surrounding. The operation of this process is easy. The ﬁnal volume of the wastes using HIC is 5e10 times smaller than packing with common container, which can reduce the disposal cost.
However, the cost of HIC is high, and the organic wastes are not suitable for storage for a long time, which can lead the growth of microorganisms and production of radiolysis gas. What is more, expensive facilities for piling up are needed.
Table 1
A comparison of different kinds of wet oxidation processes.
According to material and process, HIC can be divided into cross-linking high density polyethylene container, modiﬁed con- crete container, ductile iron container.
The cross-linking high density polyethylene container was made by Energy Solutions (ES) Company, which was approved in 1981. HIC made by polymer was used in Youggwang and Uljin nuclear power station. Fiber reinforced concrete container was  used in reprocessing plant for treatment of low-level radioactive wastes in French. MO2SAIK ductile iron container made up of slight polluted spent metal was designed by GNS Company in Germany, which has been widely used in nuclear power plant.
The third generation of nuclear power plants, such as, Zhejiang Sanmen, Shandong Haiyang and Guangdong Taishan, used HIC for packing waste after pretreatment. In Zhejiang Sanmen nuclear power plant, the resins were put into 160 L drum after drying, and then compressed by super-compaction process. After that, they were put into HIC waiting for ﬁnal disposal. Recently, researchers in China are studying the 200 L and 400 L HIC of ﬁber concrete.
4.4.Super-compaction
During the process of super-compaction, spent resins were dewatered ﬁrstly, then heated to high temperature, ﬁnally the resins were transferred into high force compactors to form pellets and stored in interim storage containers. It can be divided into three parts, dehydration, super-compaction and grouting.
Super-compaction has high volume reduction rate of 5, compared with cementation and packing in high integrity con- tainers. It produces little secondary wastes. So the cost of storage and disposal of secondary waste is low. In addition, the facility can also be used for disposal other low-level wastes.
This technology has been widely used. For example, Philip- psburg Nuclear Power Plant (NPP) in Germany and Tihange NPP in Belgium have treated more than 3800 drums of spent resins suc- cessfully in more than 10 years, and the volume reduction rate was about 4 (Roth et al., 2007).
In China, several Nuclear Power Plants, such as Zhejiang San- men, Shandong Haiyang and Guangdong Taishan, used super compaction technology. In Sanmen NPP, the wastes were com- pacted ﬁrstly, then loaded into 200 L drums, the volume reduction factor (VRF) of 3:1 was achieved. Taiwan has been using this technology for packing inﬂammable wastes, and the VRF was 3.
Super-compaction has some disadvantages, for example, it re- quires the heating unit, super compaction devices and the air-tight system for secondary gas treatment. What is more, compared with incineration, the weight and volume reduction rate was relatively low.
4.5.Microbial conversion treatment
During the microbial conversion treatment process, some ma- terials, for example, bacteria, nutrients, and catalyst were added into reactor. It utilize microbial cells to modify or degrade the structure of complicated organics. Some kinds of enzymes pro- duced in microbial metabolic process catalyze the speciﬁc groups in the substrates. Through acidiﬁcation and methanation, the resins are decomposed into methane, carbon dioxide and so on. The residue was immobilized by inert materials, and the volume reduction factor was 10e20. This method is the supplement to the existing methods.
Since 1986, Loviisa nuclear power station in Finland began to use this method to decompose the spent resins (Tusa and Box, 1989). The processing capacity was 1e2 kg resins/m3 d, and the volume reduction factor was 10e20. The Atomic Energy Research Establishment (AERE) in England also studied the microbial degradation of radioactive wastes.
However, the cultivation and processing of microorganisms are also problems. It is suitable for processing resins of low radioactive. There is no report of industrial application now.
4.6.Elution processing
Elution processing is a process that the radioactive nuclides are eluted from the resins with solution, and the residues are processed using cementation, incineration etc. However, the operation is complicated and produces secondary wastes. What is more, the waste resins are difﬁcult to achieve standard requirement after elution, so it is only used to treat some low-level radioactive spent resins.
In 1999, The method of acid stripping, that is, the resins eluted with HCl in heavy water CANDU reactor were studied by the Institute for Nuclear Research in Pitesti (Havris et al., 1999). Ac- cording to their study, 98.5% of 14C in the resins can be removed. Striping radioactive nuclides with H2SO4 was studied by the Japa- nese Mitsubishi Company, and the spent resins were processed by incineration, the eluent was treated by electrodialysis after elution. The concentrated solution of eluent and incineration ash was immobilized together at last.
5.Concluding remarks
It is very important to develop a proper technology for treat- ment and disposal of the spent radioactive resin produced in the nuclear industry. Among the inert materials for immobilization, cement is widely used for its low cost and perfect irradiation sta- bility compared with bitumen. Bitumen is ﬂammable during immobilization. The cost of plastic is high and its waste form can cause high corrosion which limits its application.
Among thermal decomposition methods, incineration and py- rolysis have large volume reduction factor, however, they will cause the problem of gas pollution. Wet oxidation processes will not induce secondary wastes, some wet oxidation method, for example, plasma technology, supercritical water oxidation and Fenton or Fenton-like process, need future research and application.
More efforts should be made to the treatment and disposal of spent resins to guarantee the sustainable development of nuclear
power industry. What is more, the volume reduction factor is of most importance when a suitable method is chosen.
Wastes minimization and their classiﬁcation management also should be paid attention to for the suitable treatment and disposal of the spent radioactive resins.
Acknowledgments
The research was supported by Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (IRT-13026). The au- thors would also like to thank the ﬁnancial support provided by the Open Research Fund Program of Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety, Ministry of Education of China, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51338005).
