<title>Development of the complex of nuclear-physical methods  of analysis for geology and technology tasks in Kazakhstan</title>
<Affiliation>Institute of Nuclear Physics, Ibragimov Str.1, 050032 Almaty, Kazakhstan</Affiliation>
<author>V. Solodukhin • I. Silachyov • V. Poznyak • I. Gorlachev</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-016-4764-y</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1007/s10967-016-4764-y</URL>
Abstract The paper describes the development of nuclear-physical methods of analysis and their applications in Kazakhstan for geological tasks and technology. The basic methods of this complex include instrumental neutron-acti- vation analysis, x-ray fluorescent analysis and instrumental c-spectrometry. The following aspects are discussed: applications of developed and adopted analytical techniques for assessment and calculations of rare-earth metal reserves at various deposits in Kazakhstan, for technology develop- ment of mining and extraction from uranium-phosphorous ore and wastes, for radioactive coal gasification technology, for studies of rare metal contents in chromite, bauxites, black shales and their processing products.
Keywords Neutron activation analysis · X-ray fluorescent analysis · Instrumental c-spectrometry · Geology · Technology
Introduction
The Republic of Kazakhstan is actively developing its resource industries. Particular attention is paid to complex utilization of mineral reserves and to higher efficiency of rare and rare-earth metals (REM) mining [1]. The country has a large number of diverse natural and anthropogenic deposits with high contents of these metals [2]. Noticeably, many of these deposits have uranium and thorium and their decay products in high concentrations. Commercial exploration of these deposits and production of rare/RE metals would depend considerably on the reliability of data on these metals and natural radionuclides (NR) contents, both in initial raw materials and in intermediate products of the technological processing.
Nuclear-physical methods of analysis (NPMA), due to their high sensitivity and capabilities for assessment of a large set of elements, proved to be a reliable tool for solving various scientific problems and practical tasks in geological, technological and metallurgic research [3]. We therefore focused on the development of a specialized complex of NPMA for analytical support of works related to rare metal and rare earth (RE) industries of Kazakhstan.
Experimental
Basic methods of the created complex are: instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA), x-ray fluorescent analysis (XRF) and instrumental c–spectrometry (IGS).
Considerable progress was achieved within the last decade in all aspects of INAA and XRF methods; the basic problems that deterred further advancement of analytical capabilities of these methods have been largely resolved. While developing the nuclear-physical methods for geol- ogy and processing industries of Kazakhstan (RK), we paid particular attention to their complex utilization based on the methods’ peculiarities, capabilities of modern hardware and methods, as well as availability and feasibility of their applications.
X-ray fluorescent analysis
For the purpose of establishing a NPMA complex, we have proposed employing the domestically manufactured
(‘‘Physics’’ LLP, Almaty) multipurpose automated energy- dispersive X-ray fluorescent spectrometer RLP-21T. The basic configuration of this spectrometer is designed to analyze powdered samples of rocks, minerals, ores, con- centrates and products from the commercial processing of minerals. The distinctive features of this spectrometer compared to similar devices are:
•A 50 W low-power X-ray tube with W-anode and two secondary targets;
•A high integral charge of the 100 kHz spectrometric channel with guaranteed resolution of 150 eV Si(Li) of the semiconductor detector (SCD);
•High-capacity mathematical software, including second and third-order effects,
•Variable measurement geometry and the matrix effect—all of which is based on a high-performance version of the fundamental coefficients method;
•Identification of Al and Si light elements in air without employing a vacuum vessel.
The multipurpose method of analysis utilized in several options requires neither certified reference materials (SRMs) nor highly skilled personnel to operate the device. The extremely compact and high-yield sample excitation unit allows for assessment of significant concentrations of light platinoids, Ag and Cd with detection limits of at least 1 lg g-1.
RLP-21T is included in the Quality Assurance in Mea- surements State Register of the Republic of Kazakhstan (No. KZ.02.02.00447). The spectrometer manufacturer has designed and certified the analytical technique (No. KZ.07.00.01569) ensuring multi-element analyses for 41 elements in third (III) category of accuracy (accuracy of common chemical analysis of mineral raw materials [4]) within the following concentration ranges of these ele- ments (%): Al, Si—from 0.5 up to 70.0; Ca, K, P, S—0.1 7 70.0; Fe, Mn, Sc, Ti, V—1 9 10-2 7 70.0; As,
Ba, Bi, Br, Co, Cu, Ga, Ge, In, Ni, Pb, Rb, Se, Sb, Sn, Sr,
Ta, Th, U, W, Y, Zn, Zr—1 9 10-4 7 70.0; Ag, Cd, Mo,
Nb, Pd, Rh, Ru—1 9 10-4 7 70.0. We did pilot testing of this technique with SRMs of minerals and ore. Based on the obtained data, corrections were introduced into the calculated concentrations for several elements (Cu, Ga, Mn, Nb, Ni, Pb, V, Y, Zn, Zr) at their lower concentrations regions. The correction was made by introducing correc- tion coefficients of 1.05–1.15 (i.e.  the  correction  for  5–15 % of the value) in the software code. There was no need to introduce corrections into calculations for higher concentrations of these elements, nor of any other of the taken elements.
Moreover, the XRF with isotope excitation (XRF IE) has been developed in the Institute of Nuclear Physics and is now in active use for element composition analyzes. The
109Cd isotopes of about 20 mCi activity and 241Am of  about 100 mCi activity with the main excitation lines at
22.1 and 59.4 keV, respectively, are employed as primary radiation sources.
The original X-ray spectra processing software designed in the INP [5] has been employed to measure counting rates at analytical range of the spectra when employing XRF IE. The software algorithm is based on the least square  method adjustment of the x-ray spectra employing a set of analytical functions which describe energy distributions from x-ray fluorescence. At processing of the spectrometric data, besides calculation of counting rates, standard devi- ations related to the counting rates are also calculated; based on them, analytical calculation errors are determined in further calculations. When calculating element contents, the ratio of counting rates from X-ray peaks to counting rates from dispersed peaks (which is also calculated by our original software) is employed as an analytical parameter to reduce errors due to geometry and self-absorption of X-ray radiation in sample bulk.
CANBERRA SLP10180 Si(Li) detector of 80 mm2 active area, 5.0 mm active thickness, 175 eV by 5.9 keV resolution and 25 micron thick input Be window is employed in the XRF IE analyses.
The method of XRF with isotope excitation is an inte- gral part of a complex analytical technique certified by the Republic of Kazakhstan State Agency for Standards (cert. No. KZ 07.00.01688). Metrological parameters of the XRF IE method have been obtained in the certification process. The range of elements and determined compounds covers Ca, TiO2, MnO, Fe2O3, Cu, Rb, Sr, La, Pb and Bi. For the majority of elements, the detection limits comprise 1–10 lg  g-1  at  relative  error  of  5–15 %  depending  on concentration of a target element.
Neutron activation analysis
The Institute of Nuclear Physics developed the analytical technique No. KZ 07.00.01688 ‘‘Determination of element composition in solid samples employing neutron activation analysis’’; the technique has been certified by the Republic of Kazakhstan State Agency for Standards. The internal standards method has been used. This method is well known and has been employed in NAA for several decades [6–13].
We also used iron as the main internal standard. This method is well studied and described in [10–13]. Besides iron, we may additionally employ some other elements as internal standards. Particularly, there are many geological and anthropogenic objects containing such elements as Rb, Sr Ba, La and Ce in amounts sufficient for their reliable identification by XRF method. Each of the elements has its advantages and disadvantages in terms of their employing as internal standards in NAA. In total, they nevertheless allow us to significantly increase reliability and accuracy. Employment of additional elements as internal standards is especially important when determining elements with high values of Q0 (the ratio of cross-section of the resonance integral to cross-section of thermal neutrons), as it allows one to evaluate the flows of thermal and epithermal neu- trons separately. Moreover, the wide list of internal stan- dard elements allows determining neutron fluxes more precisely due to higher statistics. More detailed information on application of XRF data as internal standard in NAA is presented in [14].
Sample irradiation is performed at the light-water research reactor  WWR-K.  Thermal  neutrons’  flux  in the irradiation channel comprises approximately (0.5-1.0) 9 1013 n cm-2 s-1 depending on placement of the sample container. Each sample is sealed into a 5-ml polyethylene ampule since the irradiation is performed in a so called ‘‘wet’’  channel. Sample  mass  is approximately  1 g. Upon 5-h irradiation, samples are kept in hot cells for 6–7 days to reduce the background caused by short-lived isotopes and then the first gamma-ray spectrometry using the wide range coaxial detector made of ultrapure Ge is performed for analysis of midterm-lived isotopes (half-life not more than 1 week). Spectrum uptake time for this series  of  measurements  is  around  25–30  min.  After 3–4 weeks, a second series of gamma-ray spectrometry measurements is performed at two detectors: the wide range coaxial detector with resolution of 1.8 keV at the line
1.33 MeV and the low-energy planar detector with reso- lution of 165 eV at the line 5.9 keV for analysis of long- lived isotopes. The spectrum uptake time for each detector is about 3 h.
Preparing the analytical technique for the certification and taking [4] into account, we used 23 different SRMs of soil, sediments, ore and mineral samples registered in the RK State Register. Based on these SRMs, we studied the metrology parameters for determination of 34 elements within the following concentration ranges (%): Ba, W— from  1 9 102  up  to  10.0;  Zn—1 9 10-3 7 10.0;  Rb—
1 9 10-3 7 0.2; Ag, As, Ce, Co, Cr, Hf, La, Pd, Pt, Sc,
Th—1 9 10-4 7 2 9 10-2; Au, Cs, Eu, Gd, Hg, Ho, Ir,
Lu, Nd, Pr, Re, Ru, Sb, Sm, Ta, Tb, Tm, U, Yb— 5 9 10-5 7 5 9 10-3. It has been revealed that for these concentration intervals, the errors in determination of these elements remain below the limits established for the pre- cision category III of the mineral raw material analytical techniques. For most of the elements, the detection limits are within (30–100) 9 10-3 lg g-1 depending on type and content of the determined element. The highest sensitivity was reached for gold when employing the neutron-activa- tion analysis with internal standard. The determination threshold in this case was 3 9 10-3 lg g-1.
Particularly for serial determinations of RE metals we have developed the analytical technique No. KZ.07.00.02096 ‘‘Determination of RE metals Sc, Y, Mo, La, Ce, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Tm, Yb, Lu content in geological samples by a complex of nuclear-physical methods’’ certified by the Republic of Kazakhstan Gosstandard authorities.
Y in the analyzed samples is determined by standard XRF technique using software and the algorithm provided by the RLP-21T spectrometer manufacturer. Obtained data is used for grouping of samples, selection of sample mass and regimes of their reactor irradiation at their further analysis with NAA method. Apart from that, this data will allow us to exclude the samples with low Y content from further NAA analysis (same, as a rule, applies to all other RE metals) not representing any industrial value. This then allows us to reduce the scope (and, therefore, labor inten- sity) of analytical works.
Content of other REMs is determined by relative NAA method using standard reference materials (SRMs) of rock composition: SG-4 and SGD-2A manufactured by A.P.Vinogradov Institute of Geochemistry (Irkutsk, Rus- sia) and GBW-07110, GBW-07159 manufactured in China. Since rocks are differently enriched by light and heavy lanthanides, two SRMs are, as a rule, required for calcu- lation of element contents.
Irradiation is performed in the ‘‘wet’’ channel of the reactor by the flux of thermal neutrons with density of 2 9 1013 n cm-2 s-1. Irradiation time ranges from 0.5 to 3 h and depends on the mass of a sample and presumed content of REMs in it. Upon the irradiation, the samples are stored in hot cells for 5–7 days with further measurements in	compliance	with	the	analytical	technique	No. KZ.07.00.01688. Processing of obtained spectra is per- formed using Canberra Industries ‘‘Genie-2000’’ software. Preparing this analytical technique for the certification and taking into account [4], we used more than 20 different SRMs of soil, sediments, ore, ore concentrates and mineral samples registered in the RK State Register. Based on these SRMs, we studied the metrology parameters for determi- nation of 13 rare earth elements (REE) within the following concentration   ranges   (%):   Y—from   5 9 10-4   up   to
9.9 9 10-2;    Ce—5 9 10-4 7 4.9 9 10-2;    La,    Nd—
2 9 10-4 7 9.9 9 10-2;   Gd—2 9 10-4 7 4.9 9 10-2;
Sm—5 9 10-5 7 4,9 9 10-2;	Sc—5 9 10-5 7 1.9 9
10-2;	Yb—2 9 10-5 7 9.9 9 10-3;	Ho—
2 9 10-5 7 4.9 9 10-3;   Eu—1 9 10-5 7 9.9 9 10-3;
Tm—1 9 10-5 7 1.9 9 10-3;    Tb—5 9 10-6 7 4,9 9
10-3;  Lu—5 9 10-6 7 1.9 9 10-3.  It  has  been  verified that this technique assures measurements of these 13 REE in rocks, mineral raw materials and in products of its pro- cessing within the concentration range of n 9 (10-2–10-6)  % (for different elements) by the category III of mineral raw material analysis accuracy. The determination thresholds of these  REE  are  as  follows  (%):  Y—1 9 10-5;  Ce,  Nd— 3 9 10-5;    Gd—1 9 10-4;    Eu,    Sc—6 9 10-7;    Ho—
6 9 10-6;   La,    Tb,   Tm,    Yb—2 9 10-6;    Lu,   Sm—
4 9 10-7.  Prospects  for  further  development  of  the  REE determination technique based on XRF and NAA are described in [15].
An interesting example of using the INAA and XRF methods is determining of Au content in bulk samples (*5 g) of rocks and minerals, in particular, in gold-bearing pyrites and arsenic pyrites [16]. Utilization of the internal standard method in INAA allows not only to reduce con- sumption of gold containing standard samples, but also to increase accuracy of the analysis. It is reasonable to use Fe as an internal standard when its content in samples is determined by the XRF method. When necessary, knowing content of Fe and As, one can assess the flux attenuation coefficients for thermal and resonance neutrons inside each sample [17].
In general, analytical capabilities of the developed and obtained techniques for elemental analysis (on example of geological objects) are given in Fig. 1 below.
Shading grade highlights the method used; in some cases any of the two methods is applicable depending on the content of the element to be determined. Numerical values of the lower determination threshold are given in the table below each element as it can be determined according to the certified analytical techniques. When two different values correspond to different techniques, the cell fill color corresponds to the preferable technique—INAA or XRFA. The established complex of the analytical techniques has been verified with various geological and technological SRMs. Some of the data obtained during the analysis and
verification for a wide range of elements are presented in Table 1. The column ‘‘This Work’’ in the Table presents concentration values of the studied elements with their corresponding determination errors calculated for different concentration intervals. The analysis has been performed in compliance with the recommendations (see Fig. 1). The following elements were assessed according to the ana- lytical technique No. KZ.07.00.01569: Al, Ba, Ca, Cu, Fe, Ga, K, Mn, Nb, Ni, P, Pb, Rb, Si, Sr, Ti, V, Zr; while As, Co, Cr, Cs, Hf, Sb, Th,U—according to No. KZ.07.00.01688 and Ce, Eu, La, Lu, Nd, Sc, Sm, Tb, Y,
Yb—according to No. KZ.07.00.02096. It is demonstrated by the data in Table 1 that our results are in good agree- ment with the recommendations and information values of the studied SRMs. One can therefore say that all utilized techniques assure reliable results: the results provided by the techniques vary from the recommended values by no more than 5 %. The largest discrepancy (12 %) was reg- istered between the measured Ga content (11.2 lg g-1) in SRM IAEA-Soil-7 and its information value (10 lg g-1). But even in this case the obtained value lies within the confidence interval (9–13 lg g-1) of the information value for Ga content in this SRM. Measurements of Ba, Fe, Rb, Sr and Zn employing the INAA method in the SRMs remain within the confidence intervals and completely correspond to their recommended and information values, as well as agree with XRFA data. Measured contents of Co, Cr, Mo and Th employing XRFA for several SRMs also agree with their recommended and information values from INAA.
At  serial  analyses  of  many  samples,  the  quality  is
assured by the system of internal quality control which is
Fig. 1 Certified values of determination thresholds for various elements in the analyses of geological samples by the certified techniques (in
lg g-1)
Table 1  Elemental composition of some standard reference materials (in lg g-1 dry wt.)
an integral part of each of the techniques [18]. Elements of this internal quality control are operating control of the procedures during the anayses and control over the con-  sistency of results.
The operating control of the procedures is based on precision assessment of the results in each samples’ lot employing standard samples similar in their content to the working samples. The consistency control of the analytical
results is performed with selective statistical control of the intralaboratory precision and scheduled check-ups of the analytical procedures. The control parameters such as precision, correctness, intralaboratory precision limits are presented in tabular form in the techniques’ descriptions.
Instrumental c-spectrometry
Radioactive ore with high contents of NRs in many deposits in Kazakhstan is quite promising for mining of RE metals and some rare metals. When developing the tech- nologies for processing of such ore, control over the con- tent of NRs is needed for both initial ore material and at all stages of technological processing. IGS method is used for that purpose. Determination of radionuclide composition (234Th,   226Ra,   214Pb,   214Bi,   210Pb,   235U,   227Th,   223Ra,
228Ac, 224Ra,  212Pb, 212Bi, 208Tl,  40K) in  geological  and
technology objects is performed in compliance with the accredited analytical technique ‘‘Activity of radionuclides in bulk samples. The method for measurements at a gamma-spectrometer’’ MI 5.06.001.98 RK.
The method allows measurements of samples which are preliminary  dried  and  grinded  up  to  150–200 lm.  The sample weights ranged from 5 to 200 g. Prior to the mea- surements, the samples are placed into fluoroplastic flasks of different sizes and diameters (depending of the mass of analyzed  sample)  with  a  bottom  made  of  100  lm-thick polyethylene film.
The measurements are performed at c–spectrometers with semiconductor detectors of two types: the wide-range Canberra GX-1520 and the wideband Canberra BE-3830. Measurement time depends on activity of the analyzed sample and usually takes 0.5–2 h. Taken spectra are pro- cessed by employing specialized software for gamma- spectrometry and developed in INP; this software has been successfully used for several years. The software package also includes a code for processing of complex c- and X-spectra based on the non-linear least square method and analytical description of the instrumental curve. This method assures minimal possible error in the determination of the complete absorption peak area and, correspondingly, maximum sensitivity. Another code in the software pack- age allows calculations of the absolute efficiency of reg- istration for gamma-radiation in different geometries and for different materials of a sample.
Table 2 presents half-life (T1/2), energy and quantum yield values for c-radiation of NR available for IGS. The range of radionuclides that can be registered is limited by those elements with yield of c-radiation to be natural greater than 4 %.
As it follows from the Table, decay of many radionu- clides is accompanied by c-radiation of several energies. In that case, processing the obtained c-spectra, we take into
account all the c-lines. The final result is the activity averaged over all individual lines and energies of c-radia- tion from a specific radionuclide.
As scheduled, this method is verified with geological SRMs at least on a semiannual basis (Soils: IAEA-312, IAEA-326, IAEA-327, IAEA-375, IAEA-Soil-6; Sedi- ments: IAEA-313, IAEA-314, IAEA-SL-2, IAEA-315,
IAEA-368) and it has been successfully used in radio- ecology studies for more than 15 years in Kazakhstan and in international projects [19, 20].
Since the method does not assure determination of all NRs from 232Th, 235U and 238U series, and since many of the NRs in technological objects are in the state of dis- turbed radioactive equilibrium, certain analytical tasks required special approaches and methodical exercises be used. So, when studying the NR composition of wastes from sulfate processing of uranium-phosphorous ore (so- called technogenic mineral formations—TMF), we needed to determine contents of 230Th (238U series) and  227Ac  (235U series). Radioactive decay of 230Th is accompanied with a very weak c-radiation. But content of this radionuclide in the studied waste was very high (n 9 10,000 Bq kg-1) which made it possible to develop a reliable method for determination of its concentration in  the  studied   samples   using   the   reference   radiation   Ec = 67.7 keV with low quantum yield of just 0.38 %.
Radioactive decay of 227Ac (T1/2 = 21.8 years) does not generate c-radiation. In objects with an equilibrium state of NRs, its activity corresponds to activity of the daughter product 227Th  (T1/2 = 18.7  days,  Ec = 235.97  keV), which can be determined by IGS method. In case of dis- turbed radioactive equilibrium for the determination of concentration of the mother radionuclide using the daughter one, one should take into account the rate of their radioactive equilibrium gðtÞ:
gðtÞ ¼ A2ðtÞ=A1ðtÞ	ð1Þ
Here A1(t) and A2(t)—activity of the mother and the daughter radionuclides, respectively; t—time since start of accumulation of the daughter radionuclide.
According to [21], if the half-life of the mother radionuclide (T1) is much higher than that of the daughter one (T2), the equilibrium rate gðtÞ can be calculated as:
@2
@3
Knowing the variable t and using the experimentally determined A2(t), i.e. using the 227Th specific activity, one can therefore calculate the 227Ac specific activity. Table 3 presents  experimental  data  on  Th-227  contents  in  three
Table 2 Nuclear-physics characteristics of certain radionuclides
Table 3 Contents of 227Th and 227Ac (Bq/kg) in several samples of TMF technological processing
samples of TMF processing and measured at different time
(t)after their manufacturing. It follows from the data in the Table that content of the 227Th radionuclide increases with time, i.e. radioactive equilibrium between 227Ac and 227Th in the studied samples becomes disturbed. This table also presents the  calculated values  for  227Ac concentration   in
the same samples. One can see that based on 227Th contents in different times, 227Ac concentrations in the same sample are calculated and these results agree well with each other; the described method is therefore reliable for measure- ments of this radionuclide in objects with disturbed radioactive equilibrium between 227Ac and 227Th.
The works on further expansion of capabilities for the created analytical complex have been initiated by employing and developing other methods such as ISP-MS, ICP-AES and INAA with short-lived isotopes.
Practical results
Based on the methods developed and adopted during the works on establishing the complex of nuclear-physical analysis, a set of practical geology and technology-related analytical tasks was realized in Kazakhstan. Schematically, the applications of nuclear-physical methods for geology and technology tasks in Kazakhstan are shown on a map below (see Fig. 2).
There are vast mineral resources in Kazakhstan. In particular, the country is one of the global leaders in ura- nium reserves. Intensive open pit mining and processing of uranium ore took place during the Soviet period. Consid- erable amounts of uranium-phosphorus ore sulfate pro- cessing wastes—TMF—was generated at the territory of one of the biggest specialized enterprises. These wastes are of interest, as they are rich in RE metals. Certain scientific organizations of the country explore opportunities and develop technologies for extracting such valuable metals from the TMF. The complex base of NPMA developed in the Institute of Nuclear Physics provides analytical support for such research. The obtained data are used to determine the efficiency of developed technologies and to control the level of natural radionuclide removal from the final products.
In Kazakhstan, there are several coal deposits with high uranium content. This coal cannot be used for household purposes due to radiological risks. However, it attracts significant interest as the energy source and the raw
material for extraction of certain valuable metals. We run studies based on INAA, XRFA and IGS methods on ele- mental and radionuclide content of radioactive coal sam- ples from one of the deposits in the near-Balkhash area.  The data obtained (including results of technological products’ analysis) are used for development of a new technology of plasma arc gasification of this coal.
Intensive activities aimed at identification and explo- ration of new deposits of nonferrous metals are currently in progress in Kazakhstan. In particular, at the south of the country a new deposit of bauxites was recently discovered in Karatau mountains. We are studying the elemental content of the ore from that deposit employing the INAA and XRFA methods. In the studied samples with Al2O3 content of about 35–55 %, we found considerable amounts of Zn (up to 6000 lg-1), Pb (up to 3000 lg-1), Cd (up to 6 lg-1) and REM. The results are used for planning further stages of exploration works at this deposit.
A large yttrium-RE metal deposit was recently discov- ered in the Kostanai oblast. Under a commercial contract we studied elemental content in 1387 samples of yttrium- RE metals deposit (Kostanai oblast), as well as 113 control samples for the sum of RE metals and titanium. Titanium content in the studied samples was found to be within the range \(0.11 7 0.97) %. Yttrium content—within the range  (6 7 602)  lg g-1.  The  measured  values  of  RE metals sum (lanthanides ? yttrium) in the studied samples were within the range (52 7 2656) lg g-1. The obtained results are used for assesment of Ti and RE metals reserves at this deposit.
Technological works on extracting valuable admixtures from chromite ores at one of the biggest chrome deposits in Aktobe oblast have been started in Karaganda. Concen- tration of those admixtures is low, but significant reserves of raw material at this deposit could make mining there
Fig. 2 Utilization of the nuclear-physical methods of analysis in geology, technology and metallurgy in Kazakhstan
economically feasible. At the first stage of those works, information on elemental content of selected technological samples was required. Using the INAA method, we revealed presence of such noble metals and rare elements like Ir (up to 0.6 lg g-1), Ag (up to 3 lg g-1), Cd (from 2 to 23 lg g-1), Se (up to 4 lg g-1), Sb (up to 65 lg g-1) in the ore concentrate and in some of its processing products. The obtained data confirmed feasibility of further works and development of the technology for complex processing of this raw material and wastes generated at production of sodium chromate to establish accompanying mining of the revealed valuable admixtures.
Gold exploration and ramping up gold production is of great importance to Kazakhstan. The Almaty-based geol- ogists clarify gold reserves and resources, and explore contents and grades of other valuable metals in masses of secondary quarzites in the Northern Balkhash area. This region is promising in terms of gold and silver mineral- ization. In this relation,we have studied element composi- tion in over 300 geological samples taken from certain locations in that area. Besides Au and Ag, we have also found  high contents  of  Mo  (up to  280 lg g-1),  W  (up to 90 lg g-1),   Bi   (up   to   150 lg g-1)   and   Pb   (up   to 1.7–7.0 lg g-1)  in  the  samples  explored  employing  the INAA and XRF methods. Obtained data have been used to reassess Au and Ag reserves and resources, and to do some feasibility study for associated production of other metals revealed there. Based on these data, the geologists have concluded that the NPMA provide certain advantages as compared to other methods of multielement analyses in this particular task.
Geologists   and   engineers   have   been   paying   great
attention to unconventional types of minerals over recent years. Amon such unconventional minerals are black shales with significant contents of rare metals. However, pro- cessing of such shales causes a serious problem, i.e. emission of toxic elements, and especially the emission of arsenic. It is extremely important to have accurate infor- mation and reliable data with regard to contents and grades of gold, and other valuable and harmful elements both in resources and in processes and refined products to assure that environmentally safe and friendly technologies are used in mining and refining of such types of ores. Employing the INAA and XRFA methods, we regularly run the element composition studies of certain samples derived from various stages of experimental technologies designed to comprehensively process and refine black shales. We have revealed significant contents of Au (up to 130 lg g-1), Pd (up to 6 lg g-1), Ag (up to 200 lg g-1), Pb (up to 6000 lg g-1), Sb (up to 1000 lg g-1), Cd (up to 60 lg g-1),  Se  (up  to  6 lg g-1)  in  many  samples  taken from various ore concentrates and the refined products. Findings facilitate and assist in addressing the ultimate
goal—to develop environmentally friendly technology for complex processing of such ore.
The main directions and achievements of these geo- logical and technological activities in Kazakhstan are most comprehensively described in [22, 23].
Conclusion
The specialized base of NPMA have been established to solve analytical tasks in the fields of geology and tech- nology in Kazakhstan. The base incorporates a complex of methods developed and adjusted for specifics of rare metal and rare-earth industries of the country; the methods are based on INAA, XRF and instrumental c-spectrometry. Works on further expansion of analytical capabilities of the created specialized base are in progress and are stimulated by the development of NAA with short-lived isotopes and ICP-MS and ICP-AES.
The developed and adjusted methods have been used for assessment and calculations of rare-earth metals at various deposits in Kazakhstan, for creation mining and extraction technologies (uranium-phosphorous ore and wastes), for radioactive coal gasification technology, for studies of rare metal contents in chromite, bauxites, black shales and their processing products.
The specialized analytical base and the new data it can obtain, will stimulate progress in rare metal and rare-earth industries of Kazakhstan.
