<title>A dose assessment method for arbitrary geometries with virtual reality in the nuclear facilities decommissioning</title>
<Affiliation>School of Electric Power, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China</Affiliation>
<author>Zhuang Wang, Jiejin Cai</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2018.09.003</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2018.09.003</URL>
ABSTRACT
In this paper, a novel method based on net function interpolation is proposed to reconstruct nuclear radiation  ﬁeld on the basis of the sparse observed data. In the grid space, the missing data of grid line is ﬁlled by means of constructing function. Then, the value of grid interior points is obtained by use of the net function interpolation method. To demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed method, the simulation experiment concerning a single point source is carried out. Compared with the simulation results of Monte Carlo method, the calculation results perform well. To make the simulation environment real, another experiment with multiple volumetric sources is done. The inversion results are also satisfactory. What's more, as the sampling data increases, the degree of reduction is further improved. It is worthwhile mentioning that the results have relative errors of 1.91%, 5.47% and 1.22% respectively. In this paper, the radiation ﬁeld is restored very well according to the sparse sampling data. Hence, the proposed method is a quite eﬀective way for the inversion of nuclear radiation ﬁeld.
Keywords:
Inversion
Nuclear radiation ﬁeld Net function interpolation
Introduction
Nuclear energy is promising, but the potential hazard can not be ignored. In the process of nuclear energy being used safely, radiation is an unavoidable problem. Notably, constructing nuclear radiation ﬁeld is necessary in most cases. At present, nuclear radiation ﬁeld can be constructed by forward or inversion method. Much work so far has focused on the forward modeling method, which is mainly applicable to situations where the radioactive sources are known. In practice, the loss event of radioactive source occurs occasionally. For this case, inversion method shows its advantages of restoring the radiation ﬁeld. It is a pity that the inversion method of nuclear radiation ﬁeld has not been in- tensively investigated. For this reason, this paper proposes a novel method to achieve nuclear radiation ﬁeld inversion.
This work is based on basic radiation protection knowledge (ICRU, 1980; Zhu and Chen, 2016) and related mathematical theory (Schatzman, 2002). Diﬀerent from the existing detection technique and calculation methods (Raza and Iqbal, 2005; Tanaka et al., 2010; Pereira et al., 2017; Sato et al., 2014), this work is aimed at restoring the ra- diation ﬁeld according to sparse observed data. Hence, the interpola- tion method is a priority. Several excellent reviews describing the ap- plication of interpolation are available (Maeland, 1988; Qiu et  al.,  1991; Egbert, 1997; Thévenaz et al., 2000), which suggest that inter- polation can play an important role in inversion. Considerable research
eﬀorts have been devoted to the interpolation theory (Cook, 1974; Barnsley and Demko, 1984; Barnsley et al., 1986; Boissonnat and Cazals, 2001), which contribute to this work. Zhang and Zou (2015) addressed the inversion problem in their work , but they did not thoroughly study the inversion of radiation ﬁeld based on sparse data. Therefore, this paper focuses on the reconstruction of radiation ﬁeld on the basis of sparse data. In order to reconstruct the radiation ﬁeld, the radiation space is divided into grids, and subsequently the corre- sponding grid node data is sampled. The nuclear radiation ﬁeld can be restored completely by use of the proposed method in this paper. To verify the feasibility of the proposed method, the experimental simu- lation is carried out. The computation results are compared with the simulation results of Monte Carlo method (X - 5 Monte Carlo Team, 2003; Agostinelli et al., 2003; Allison et al., 2006; Khattab et al., 2013; Kirk, 2010). After analysis and veriﬁcation, the proposed method re- constructs the radiation ﬁeld successfully on the basis of sparse data.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 de- scribes the generation of spatial grids and data collection; Section 3 proposes the inversion method; Section 4 carries out the simulation experiments; Section 5 analyses the relative error and Section 6 con- cludes the paper.
Fig. 1. Division  of the radiation space.
Fig. 2. The interpolation method of grid line.
Spatial grids generation and data sampling
The radiation space is divided into a large number of grids at regular intervals. The grid node data, radiation intensity, is observed or cal- culated. A detailed description of Fig. 1 is given in the following paragraph.
points from x = 0 to x = at intervals of a/n meters. And the Y axis is inserted into m + points from y = 0 to y = b at intervals of b/m me-
ters.  So,  the  rectangular  area  contains  (n   1)    (m    1)   nodes.  In Fig. 1, the coarse grid data is observed and the ﬁne grid node data must be obtained by calculation. The speciﬁc calculation method is to be introduced in the next section.
Table 1
The sampling data (μSv/h).
Note that the data in the ﬁrst row represents x-coordinate (cm) and the data in the ﬁrst column represents y-coordinate (cm).
Inversion method
Basic knowledge
For a point source with A Curie radioactivity, the formula of Kerma rate at a distance of R (m) from the radiation source is as follows:
@1
where, Γk is the Kerma rate constant. This formula is critical for the following.
Based on the measured radiation intensity of coarse grid nodes, then culated by the net function interpolation method.
Calculating the value of grid line
For the nodes on the grid line, R is a single variable function. For example, if the coordinates of the radiation source are (a, b, c), the Kerma rate of the nodes on the grid line in the X-axis direction is as
@2
Fig. 3. The interpolation method of grid interior nodes.
Fig. 4. The simulation results of Monte Carlo method.(a) The radiation ﬁeld.(b) Top view of the radiation ﬁeld.
Obviously, both y and z are ﬁxed, which means that there is only one variable in Eq. (2). Then,
@3
For the reason that	y and z are constants, let
@4
Apparently, Eq. (4) is a quadratic function.
=1fClearly,is a quadratic function. Based on the  the steps of inversion method are as follows:
Step1: For any three adjacent coarse grid nodes P1(x1, g (x1)),randomly — p1: y = F1 (x). And the parabola intersects the line P2(x2, g (x2)) and P3(x3,g (x3)), make a parabola over points P1 and P2
x	x3 at the point P3 (x3, F1 (x3)).
Step2:   Make   a   parabola   over   points   P2    and  P3    randomly —
p2′: y	F2 (x) and the parabola intersects the line x	x1 at the point
out that Eq. (6) is a binary quadratic function.
P1 (x1, F3 (x1)).
Step3: Make a parabola over points P1 , P2 and P3 —
Step4: The interpolation function is as follows:
@5
Step5: The radiation intensity f is equal to F−1 (x).
Note that function F1 and F2 preserve the portions that are near the interval endpoint, where the error is small. As for the portions with large error, function F3 plays a regulatory role. Therefore, the inter- polation function has a good approximation. Fig. 2 is an image de-
Calculating the value of grid interior points
Similarly, Eq. (3) also applies to this case. However, there are two variables in this case. Hence, the following formula can be demon- strated.
@6
where, z is assumed to be ﬁxed and d2 = (z − c)2. It should be pointed In  the  following  discuss−ion,  f  is  the  radiation  intensity  of  grid  in-terior  nodes. Clearly, g	f 1 is a binary quadratic function. Based on  the above description, the inversion steps of grid interior node value are
as follows:
Step1: Within a unit grid, the four vertices are P , P2, P3 and P4. For any point in the unit grid Q (x, y), the projection points on the four sides are Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4. The coordinates of all points are shown in Fig. 3.
Step2: Get the following three equations.
Fig. 5. The inversion results of the proposed method. (a) The radiation ﬁeld. (b) Top view of the radiation ﬁeld.
Fig. 6. The simulation environment of the multiple sources.
@7
@8
@9
Table 2
The 7     9  sampling data (μSv/h).
Note that the data in the ﬁrst row represents x-coordinate (cm) and the data in the ﬁrst column represents y-coordinate (cm).
Step3: Get the interpolation function.
G (Q)	G1 (Q)	G2 (Q)	G3 (Q)
Step4: Get the radiation intensity of grid interior nodes, f = G 1.
Implementation plan
The inversion scheme is to be implemented in MATLAB. During this
process, the concentration surface is generated. Steps for implementa-tion of this method are as follows:
Fig. 7. The simulation results of multiple sources. (a) The radiation ﬁeld. (b) Top view of the radiation ﬁeld.
Step 1: Generate the spatial grids and simulate radiation ﬁeld ac- cording to Monte Carlo method;
Step 2: Sample the coarse node data from the simulated radiation
ﬁeld;
Step 3: Calculate the value of grid line on the basis of Eq. (5);
Step 4: Calculate the value of grid interior nodes based on Eq. (10); Step 5: Finish the reconstruction of radiation ﬁeld and compare it Method application and results
To verify the feasibility of the proposed inversion method, a simu- lation  experiment  is  carried  out.  The  simulated  environment  is  aroom (the unit of distance is centimeters placed in (500, 1000, 200). The radioactivity is 3.7  ×  108    Bq. In order to spatial grids: the X axis is inserted into 90 points from x = to x = 895 at intervals of 0 cm; the Y axis is inserted into 160 points from y = 5 to y 1595 at intervals of 0 cm. So, there are 90 160 grid nodes, in-
cluding 4 5 sampling nodes (Table 1).
The MCNP5 program based on Monte Carlo method is used to si- mulate the real radiation environment. The FMESH card is used as tally and the number of particle histories is 4 108. Fig. 4 shows the simu- lation results of Monte Carlo method. Based on the sparse sampling data, the whole radiation ﬁeld can be restored by using the proposed net function interpolation method. The inversion results are shown in Fig. 5.
To simulate the real radiation environment, another experiment with multiple volumetric sources is carried out. The simulated en- vironment is still a	room. There are three source terms (Fig. 6): a sphere source, a cuboid source and a cylindrical
emission rate is 2 ×	8 neutron/s and the energy is 4.5 MeV . The axis of the cylinder is along the y-axis and the coordinates of the center of the bottom are (700, 980, 450). The neutron emission rate is
(530, 1130, 430). The neutron emission rate is 2.5	107 neutron/s and the energy is 4.2 MeV .
In order to simplify the calculation, only the dose equivalent dis-
The space is still divided into 90 × 160 grid nodes, but there are 7 × 9 he same way, the MCNP5 program is used to simulate the real radia- particle histories is
Fig. 7 shows the simulation results of Monte tion environment. The FMESH card is used as tally and the number of
Carlo method. Based on the sparse sampling data, the whole radiation ﬁeld can be reconstructed by using the proposed net function inter- polation method. The inversion results are shown in the Fig. 8. As the sparse sampling data increases, the degree of reduction of the radiation ﬁeld is further improved. Fig. 9 shows the inversion results of multiple Fig. 8. The inversion results of multiple sources (sparser sampling data). (a) The radiation ﬁeld. (b) Top view of the radiation ﬁeld.
sources according to 0 17 sparse sampling nodes (Table 3).  It  is evident that the inversion results are more close to the simulation re- sults compared with Fig. 8.
Results assessment
Obviously, the results are similar by comparing the simulation re- sults with the inversion results. In order to further estimate the reduc- tion degree of the radiation ﬁeld, the concept of relative error is in- troduced. The formula is as follows:
@10
where, Mij is the grid node data generated by Monte Carlo method; fij is the grid node data calculated by the proposed net function interpolation method; R is the relative error.
Table 4 shows the relative error of the experiments. For the simu- lation experiments in this paper, the results of relative error are just 1.91%, 5.47% and 1.22% respectively, which are reasonable. In other words, the results calculated by the proposed method are close to the simulation results. Hence, the proposed net function interpolation method is feasible for the inversion of nuclear radiation ﬁeld. What's more, as the sampling data increases, the relative error can be further reduced, which is meaningful for the precise reduction of the radiation ﬁeld. Notably, the net function interpolation method is more suitable
multiple volumetric sources, because the method itself is a good in- terpolation method. Therefore, this method has strong applicability without considering radiation shielding. Table 4 also shows the ratio NS/N , which is aimed at reﬂecting the sparse degree of sampling data. If the ratio NS/N is less than a certain value (5%), the sampling data is consider sparse.
Conclusion
To reconstruct the radiation ﬁeld, a novel method based on net function interpolation is proposed in this paper. The radiation space is divided into a large number of grids. On the basis of the sparse observed data, the dose equivalent rate value of grid line is ﬁlled. Then, the for single source situations. Nevertheless, it can also work well forthe net function. To demonstrate the accuracy of the proposed method, the simulation experiment about a single point source is carried out. The relative error is just 1.91% after analysis, which suggests that the inversion results are consistent with the simulation results of Monte Carlo method. To make the simulation environment real, another ex- periment with multiple volumetric sources is done. And the relative error is 5.47%, which means that the inversion results are close to the simulation results. Hence, the proposed method is eﬀective for the in- version of nuclear radiation ﬁeld. It is important to highlight that the observed data of the inversion method is sparse. In other words, the proposed method can restore the radiation ﬁeld exactly with quite little data, which is very signiﬁcant in practical use. What's more, as the sampling data increases, the relative error can be further reduced to
Fig. 9. The inversion results of multiple sources (increased sampling data). (a) The radiation ﬁeld. (b) Top view of the radiation ﬁeld.
Table 3
The   0 *17  sampling data (μSv/h).
Table 4
The assessment of relative error.
1.22%, which is meaningful for the precise reduction of the radiation ﬁeld. In a word, this work can be a theoretical support means for the reconstruction of nuclear radiation ﬁeld.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 11675057) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant no. 2017ZD100).
