<title>Development of stable nuclear radiation detectors based on n-silicon/cobalt-phthalocyanine heterojunctions</title>
<Affiliation>a.Technical Physics Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400 085, India
b.Chemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400 085, India</Affiliation>
<author>A. Ray , R. Prasad, C.A. Betty, T.V. Chandrasekhar Rao</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2015.11.007 </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2015.11.007 </URL>
H I G H L I G H T S
●n-Si/CoPc heterojunction α-detectors of two thicknesses of CoPc (100 & 200 nm) were prepared.
●Detector with 100 nm CoPc, offers reliable operation of α-detectors with higher shelf life.
●Detectors showed very low leakage current and good α-energy resolution.
a b s t r a c t
n-silicon/cobalt-phthalocyanine (CoPc) heterojunction based nuclear detectors have been fabricated using thermally evaporated CoPc ﬁlms. Two different thicknesses of CoPc ﬁlm (viz. 100 nm and 200 nm) were tried out to make detectors by depositing on chemically polished n-Si wafers. Gold ﬁlm on CoPc was used as electrical contact. The detectors were characterized by measuring their current–voltage (I–V) and leakage current–time (I–t) characteristics, followed by alpha energy spectra obtained on exposure to α-particles. Variation of alpha energy resolution with applied reverse bias voltage for each of the de- tectors was also studied. The detectors showed very low leakage current and high breakdown voltage as
compared to conventional Au/n-Si surface barrier detectors. Finally, the durability of the detectors was established by measuring their I–V characteristics and energy resolution for nearly 15 months.
Keywords: Nuclear Radiation Detector Heterojunction
1.Introduction
Organic semiconductor materials are becoming increasingly popular for varied applications in modern generation devices. Among different organic semiconductor materials such as por- phyrins (Zhu et al., 1993), phthalocyanines (Vukusic and Sambles, 1992) and conductive polymers, the phthalocyanines are more promising as they are thermally and chemically stable and their thin ﬁlms can be easily prepared by thermal evaporation. In earlier studies, metal phthalocyanines (MPcs) were used for devices such as chemical and gas sensors (Radhakrishnan and Deshpande, 2002), photoconducting devices (Law, 1993), photovoltaic cells (Anthopoulos and Shafai, 2003) and nonlinear optics (de  la Torre  et al., 1998) etc. The working principle of MPc gas sensor is based on changes in resistance of their ﬁlms on exposure to oxidizing or reducing gases such as NOx and halogens. On the contrary, there is very little information available in the literature on the possibility of using organic layers for nuclear detector applications, pre- sumably due to relatively low carrier mobility in organic semi- conductors and sensitivity to radiation damage. However, these materials have properties similar to inorganic semiconductors and can ﬁnd applications in ﬂexible detectors. These materials are less expensive than conventional crystals used for radiation detectors and are available in nanostructures with high surface/volume ra- tio. Further cost savings are realized through fabrication processes that are less complex than those for wafer-based devices. Cur- rently silicon detectors occupy a key position in high energy physics experiments. Usually two different fabrication processes are in use today for these detectors: the planar process in con- nection with ion-implantation and the surface barrier technology. While the planar process needs costly equipment and sophisti- cated procedures, much less complicated process steps are in- volved in the surface barrier technology. Among all the organic materials, metal phthalocyanines remain robust under the same daunting conditions that all existing semiconductor materials al- ready endure and in short their chemical stability is excellent. This property qualiﬁes them to be used in nuclear detectors. Metal substituted Phthalocyanines with polymorphic metastable α forms or stable β forms can be prepared by physical vapor deposition at different temperatures (Gould, 1996). The main difference be- tween the two forms is in the stacking angle of  the  molecular plane which can get modiﬁed due to the heat produced from the absorption of ionizing radiation. Change in optical properties and related shift of Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO) and Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) bands, change in conduction and capacitance under the inﬂuence of high dose io- nizing radiation for Ag/MnPc/Ag has been reported by Arshak et al. (Arshak et al., 2004). Besides, a change in conductance and capa- citance on exposure to α radiation  has  been  reported  by Kozelj  et al. (Kozelj et al., 2006). Even though it is known that organic materials undergo irreversible chemical processes under high dose of irradiation known as radiolysis due to the rupturing of C–H and C–C bonds producing new organic compounds (Arshak et al.,  2004; Kozelj et al., 2006; Holmes-siedle and Adams, 1993), de- tection of alpha particle with organic semiconductors was de- monstrated to be possible by Beckerle and Strobele (Beckerle and Strobele, 2000). In our earlier study (Ray et al., 2009), copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) has been utilized for fabrication of nuclear detectors based on n-silicon/copper phthalocyanine heterojunc- tions. Those detectors showed lower leakage current and more stability than the conventional surface barrier detectors. Later, it has been reported that MnPc, FePc and CoPc have a stronger binding with gold than NiPc, CuPc and ZnPc as per theoretical calculations involving free standing molecules of 3d-transition metal phthalocyanines (MPc, where M Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu or Zn)  on Au (Zhang et al., 2011). The effect of irradiation on a semi- conducting material and the consequent degradation will reﬂect in device properties in a complex way. Besides, the inﬂuence of ra- diation depends on both the dose and the parameters of the ﬁlms including their thicknesses. So in this study we selected CoPc with two different thicknesses in place of CuPc and report on nuclear particle detectors based on p-type cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPc)/n- Si heterojunctions.
2.Experimental
Fabrication of CoPc/n-Si heterojunction detectors was carried out as follows:
Initially, single crystal silicon slices (n-type, ∼1 kΩ-cm re- sistivity, 25 mm diameter and 1 mm thickness) were cut from an
ingot with the help of diamond wheel in a silicon wafer making machine. These slices are mechanically lapped with carborandum powders of various grain sizes, followed by chemical polishing on both sides in 6:1:1 (by volume) solution of HNO3:HF:CH3COOH. Prior to the deposition of CoPc, the samples were thoroughly cleaned using trichloroethelene, dried and mounted on a ceramic mount using organic epoxy. Thin ﬁlm of cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPc) of desired thickness (100 nm or 200 nm) was thermally deposited in a controlled fashion with a very low but constant deposition rate (0.1–0.3 °A/Sec) on one side of the substrate using tantalum boat under high vacuum (∼10—6 Torr). The depositions were carried out at a substrate temperature of 300 K followed by in situ deposition of Au contacts (thickness ∼40 μg/cm2) on CoPc ﬁlms by thermal evaporation without exposing the ﬁlms to at- mosphere. Ohmic Al contacts were deposited on backside of the substrates. After fabrication, active regions of the detectors were 15–18 mm in diameter. The performances of these fabricated de- tectors were evaluated by carrying out current–voltage (I–V) characteristics measurement (both forward and reverse char- acteristics), studying the variation of reverse leakage current over a period of time (I–t) for a constant value of applied reverse bias voltage, measurement of response to α-particles (i.e. measuring optimum alpha energy resolution) and measuring the variation of
alpha energy resolution with reverse bias voltage. Measurement of I–V characteristics under forward and reverse bias conditions were carried out using Keithley programmable electrometer. Alpha spectra for the detectors were measured using 241Am–239Pu dual α-particle source and PC based multi channel analyzer. The energy resolutions of the detectors were measured as a function of re- verse bias voltage (silicon positive with respect to CoPc). For alpha particle spectroscopic measurements, the source and the detector were placed in a vacuum chamber (at ∼10—3 Torr) with a separa- tion of the order of the diameter of the detector.
3.Results and discussions
The detector with CoPc ﬁlm thickness of 100 nm is termed as detector 1 and that with a thickness of 200 nm is termed as de- tector 2. The forward I–V curves of the two detectors are shown in Fig. 1 and the reverse I–V curves are shown in Fig. 2. From the forward and reverse characteristics we can say that both the de- tectors are showing diode behavior. Supplementary information Fig. S1 shows the I–V curve of detector1 ﬁtted with diode equation with diode ideality factor of n ¼ 0.536.
On the other hand, I–t curves of the two detectors are shown in Fig. 3 and we note that the reverse leakage current for detector 1 is twice than that of detector 2. From the I–t curves we can say that both the detectors are quite stable at a ﬁxed applied reverse bias voltage as far as the leakage current is concerned, even though the
leakage current for detector 1 is higher than detector 2. Fig. 4
(a) and (b) show the long term performance of forward I–V char- acteristics of detectors 1 and 2, respectively. It is seen that the forward current for Au/CoPc/n-Si detectors has remained zero up to a larger forward voltage with passage of time. If the applied voltage is more than this value then a rise in forward current is observed. This may be due to the fact that the backside aluminum contact on n-silicon, which was ohmic at the time of fabrication of the detector, got converted to a rectifying contact due to the aging of the detector (Northrop and Puddy, 1971). Whereas on the front side, Au/CoPc junction is ohmic due to negligible energy barrier between Au and CoPc. So two junctions exist in the device, one at CoPc/n-Si interface and the other at n-Si/Al interface. Even though we are making the front side junction (i.e. CoPc/n-Si junction) of  the detector forward biased, the device current is blocked by the weakly reverse biased Al/n-Si junction formed due to aging. Once the applied bias exceeds the limiting value of the n-Si/Al junction
Fig. 1. Forward I–V characteristics of the two detectors.
Fig. 2. Reverse I–V characteristics of the two detectors.
Fig. 3. I–t characteristics of the two detectors for a ﬁxed  reverse  bias voltage of  40 V.
barrier, the overall forward current increases in the device. The long term performance of reverse I–V characteristics of detectors 1 and 2 are shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), respectively. With respect to Fig. 5(a) and (b), only marginal change in leakage current is ob-served over a time gap of 15 months, suggesting good stability of the devices. The reason for the marginal rise of the leakage current may be attributed to the degradation (due to aging) of organic epoxy used for edge passivation of the detectors. It is also to be noted that the reverse leakage current for detectors decreases with time at the operational voltages. For charged particle detection, these detectors were exposed to α-particles from a dual source (241Am–239Pu) with energies of 5.48 and 5.15 MeV. The detectors used for this measurement had an active area of ~ 250 mm2. During measurements, both detector and source were placed in vacuum of ~ 10—3 Torr with a distance of ~ 20 mm between de- tector and source. Both the detectors could be operated smoothly up to a reverse bias voltage of 500 V applied through a load re- sistance of 110 M Ω. The alpha energy resolution of the detectors was found to be a function of applied voltage. Figs. 6 and 7 are showing  the alpha spectra for optimum resolution of detectors 1 and 2 respectively, measured just after fabrication as well as after a gap of 15 Months. It is observed that even though the active
Fig. 4. (a) and (b): Long term behavior for forward I–V characteristics of detector 1 and 2.
area  of  detector  2  (180 mm2)  is  less  than  that  of  detector  1  (260 mm2), the best energy resolution measured for detector 1 is    41 keV (and corresponding depletion depth is 265 μm)  and that  for detector 2 is 45 keV (and corresponding  depletion  depth  is  240 μm). The reason for poorer resolution of detector 2 can be attributed to the thickness of CoPc layer which is twice that of detector 1 and hence offering thicker dead layer to alpha particles. Moreover it was found during the measurement of alpha energy resolution that the detectors 1 and 2 break down for an applied reverse voltage of 350 V and 330 V, respectively, which is con- sistent with larger active area of detector 1 requiring larger reverse bias voltage to break down. For comparison, we can see from Ortec product catalog that for ruggedized partially depleted silicon de- tectors  with  active  area  of  300 mm2  and  depletion  depth  of  300 μm, a guaranteed maximum resolution of 21 keV is offered.  For detector 1 (Fig. 6), we found that there is negligible shift of energy resolution (from 41 keV to 44 keV) in 15 months, showing the stability of the device. On the contrary for detector 2, there is a
Fig. 5. (a) and (b): Long term behavior for reverse I–V characteristics of detector1 and 2.
Fig. 6. Alpha Spectrum of detector 1 as-prepared and 15 Months after fabrication.
Fig. 7. Alpha Spectrum of detector 2 as-prepared and 15 Months after fabrication.
Fig. 8. Variation of energy resolution with reverse bias voltage for both the detectors.
shift of energy resolution from 45 keV to 64 keV (Fig. 7). This may be due to the generation of defects from oxygen and moisture in CoPc layer with time which is though few in number but more signiﬁcant in thicker layer. Therefore, we note that 100 nm thick CoPc layer offers better energy resolution and better stability of  the detector as compared to 200 nm thick CoPc layer. The variation of energy resolution (for both the detectors) with reverse bias voltage is plotted in Fig. 8. In this ﬁgure, the voltage shown is the total applied voltage to the device, in series with a load resistance of 110 M Ω. From this plot we can see that initially the energy resolution improves with increase in reverse bias and further in- crease of reverse bias causes deterioration of resolution.  This is due to the fact that at lower reverse bias voltage, there is in- complete charge collection. So the resolution improves till the charge generated due to incident radiation gets collected fully. Then further increase of reverse bias causes increase in the leakage current which deteriorates the energy resolution.
4.Conclusions
We have undertaken fabrication and characterization of n-Si- CoPc heterojunction nuclear detectors  with  different  thicknesses of CoPc (100 and 200 nm). Detector characterization has been carried out using I–V measurements and alpha particle spectra, measured for as-prepared and long term stored detectors. Though the forward I–V characteristics were similar for both as-prepared detectors, reverse leakage current was marginally higher for de- tector 1 with 100 nm thick CoPc ﬁlm. The energy resolution of α spectrum was more or less similar (40 keV) for both devices. However after a period of 1 year it was found that the reverse leakage current decreased slightly for detector 1 where as it was slightly higher for detector 2 (with 200 nm thick CoPc ﬁlm). Si- milarly the energy resolution remained more or less the same for detector 1 even after 15 months, whereas it decreases for detector
2. The study suggest that detector fabricated with 100 nm CoPc offers easy fabrication  method and reliable operation of low dose α detectors with higher shelf life.
Acknowledgment
Authors gratefully acknowledge Dr. D.K. Aswal [Head, Thin Film Devices Section, TPD] and Dr. S.K. Gupta [Head, Technical Physics Division (TPD), BARC] for encouragement and support.
