<title>Optimal design of supercritical CO2 power cycle for next generation nuclear power conversion systems</title>
<author>Zhangpeng Guo, Yang Zhao, Yaoxuan Zhu, Fenglei Niu, Daogang Lu</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Affiliation>Beijing Key Laboratory of Passive Nuclear Power Safety and Technology, North China Electric Power University, Beijing, 102206, China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.04.023</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.04.023</URL>
ABSTRACT
Most generation IV (Gen IV) nuclear reactors have high operating temperatures to increase power plant eﬃ- ciency and to allow for hydrogen production. The widely used steam Rankine cycle is not suitable for Gen IV reactors because of high turbine inlet temperature with extremely high pressure by using ultra-supercritical  (USC) steam cycle. The supercritical CO2 (S-CO2) recompression cycle can achieve a competitively high thermal eﬃciency with turbine inlet temperature at 500–600 °C and turbine inlet pressure at 20 MPa. However, the operating pressure of the heat source is still too high to promote its application and impede the licensing of using S-CO2 cycle for nuclear power plant. The aim of this work is to reduce the operating pressure of heat sources in  the S-CO2 cycle, since the heat sources are usually accompanied by high radiation or high temperature en- vironment. A combined recompression cycle and dual expansion turbine technology is ﬁrst recommended to reduce the operating pressure of heat source for nuclear power plants and maintain high thermal eﬃciency. Additionally, sensitivity analysis is performed for three types of S-CO2 power cycles to compare the merits and faults. An optimization analysis is also presented. The results show that the combined recompression cycle and dual expansion turbine technology is eﬀective and suitable for Gen IV reactors with a relatively low heat source operating pressure and high thermal eﬃciency. This kind of S-CO2 cycle can be coupled with diﬀerent kinds of heat sources to reduce their operating pressure.
Keywords:
Optimal design Recompression cycle Dual expansion cycle
1.Introduction
The Supercritical CO2 power cycle (S-CO2) is known for its simple layout, compactness, high thermal eﬃciency, low capital cost and short construction period. Feher proposed a power cycle that operated above the critical pressure of CO2 and postulated an engine based on this cycle could be compact and can be used for power generation or propulsion (Feher, 1967). The S-CO2 cycle achieves high thermal eﬃciency due to lower CO2 compression work near the critical point and higher turbine inlet temperature. The S-CO2 cycle is a potential candidate, which can be used by many kinds of heat sources, including geothermal power, coal power, concentrated solar power, waste heat, high temperature fuel cell, nuclear power and fusion power (Ahn et al., 2015). Speciﬁ- cally, the S-CO2 Brayton cycle for coal-ﬁred power plants is studied and diﬀerent layouts are analyzed to obtain optimum performance (Mecheri and Le Moullec, 2016). Dynamic behavior of a concentrated solar power S-CO2 cycle with multi-stage compression–expansion is studied (Osorio et al., 2016). The optimization analysis of S-CO2 cycle for DEMO fusion reactor is performed (Linares et al., 2015). Angelino and Feher ﬁrst suggested that nuclear power plants appeared to be the most
promising application of the S-CO2 cycle (Angelino, 1967). Recently, Dostal et al. suggested S-CO2 cycle should be used in next generation nuclear reactors (Dostal et al., 2004). Compared with Rankine cycle, S- CO2 cycle is more suitable for Gen IV nuclear reactors because Gen IV reactors usually have high operating temperature (500–900 °C) and moderate operating pressure. Although ultra-supercritical (USC) steam cycles can meet the requirement of high operating temperature (500–600 °C), the operating pressure is extremely high (34 MPa), which may limit its application for the nuclear industry because the reactor vessel is under high radiation environment. When the operating tem- perature is above 500 °C, S-CO2 cycles have been proven to be more eﬃcient than the super-heated steam-Rankine cycle or even than the helium Brayton cycle at equal operating temperature because of sig- niﬁcantly low compression work (Yoon et al., 2012). Usually, the ratio of compression work to turbine work is approximate 30% for S-CO2 cycle, 45% for helium Brayton cycle and 50% for gas turbine Brayton cycle.
The Sodium Fast Reactor (SFR) employs a steam Rankine cycle that originated from the Experimental Breeder Reactor (EBR-I) in 1951 (Sackett, 1997). The latest sodium fast reactor designs still employ the steam Rankine cycle. This is because the Rankine cycle is a widely-used technology with substantial engineering experience, making it bene- ﬁcial from both an economic and licensing perspective (IAEA, 2011). However, the strong chemical reaction between sodium and water al- ways poses a potential threat to overall system safety. The compen- sating method is to adopt an intermediate loop that isolates the sodium in the primary loop from the steam cycle. Although this method can mitigate severe accidents caused by chemical reaction to some extent, it does not entirely avoid the potential risk of the sodium water reaction. As a result, J.P. Van Dievoet proposed a coupled sodium – CO2 fast breeder reactor concept in 1968, which simpliﬁed the design from the three loops to two loops, to limit reactions between CO2 and sodium. The chemical reaction products (sodium carbonate and free carbon) are not readily corrosive (Dievot, 1968). However, the Dievoet design was never constructed because PWRs and BWRs have been the dominant design choice since the 1960s. Additionally, the S-CO2 cycle technology has historically not been used for power conversion. Recently, the S- CO2 cycle technology is being revisited and commercial engineering design of S-CO2 cycle is underway. Some S-CO2 cycle integral test loops have been built (Ahn et al., 2015). Furthermore, many countries want to revisit closed fuel cycle by using sodium fast reactor to make full use of nuclear fuel in order to reduce the nuclear waste in a sustainable way. Consequently, more and more studies emphasized the application of S-CO2 for sodium fast reactors (Dostal et al., 2006; Moisseytsev and Sienicki, 2009; Saez et al., 2008). Diﬀerent kinds of S-CO2 cycles were compared to study their suitability for European Sodium Fast Reactor (ESFR) (Pérez-Pichel et al., 2012). French Atomic and Alternative En- ergies studied S-CO2 cycle for the next French SFR, namely ASTRID (1500 MWth) (Floyd et al., 2013; Hong-Son Pham et al., 2016). Re- cently, some SFRs are being designed as small modular reactors (SMR), namely PRISM, 4S, Prototype Gen-IV SFR (PG-SFR), ARC-100 and AFR
-100 (Ahn and Lee, 2014; Sienicki et al., 2014). SMRs have advantages, like electricity generation, desalination, ship propulsion system, district heating, small construction period, low expenses and low ﬁnance risk. The Advanced Fast Reactor (AFR) –100 designed by Argonne National Laboratory is an ideal application for the S-CO2 Brayton Cycle with a core outlet temperature at 550 °C and a turbine inlet temperature at 517 °C (Sienicki et al., 2014). The parameters of AFR-100 are used to build the power conversion model for S-CO2 cycle in this work, which is seen as a reference case. As the indirect cycle is used, the intermediate exchanger (IHX) transfers energy from the primary sodium loop to the S-CO2 power cycle. The AFR-100 provides thermal power and de- termines the IHX outlet temperature that is maximum temperature in the loop.
In terms of the S-CO2 Brayton cycle, there are many diﬀerent lay- outs, among which recompression cycle, also called “Feher cycle” (Moisseytsev and Sienicki, 2009) is suggested as the best candidate for utilization of the S-CO2 Brayton cycle. This is due to less compression work required and higher thermal eﬃciency. Speciﬁcally, one part of S- CO2 ﬂow goes through recompression process without heat rejection. This design tackles the pinch point problem and increases the low temperature recuperator (LTR) eﬀectiveness. This cycle achieves a competitively high thermal eﬃciency with turbine inlet temperature at 500–600 °C and turbine inlet pressure at 20 MPa. It is worth noting that intercooling is frequently used for helium Brayton cycles to reduce the overall compression work, but compression work is already small for S- CO2 cycle and the beneﬁt from intercooling is negligible. The Feher or recompression cycle is more suitable for achieving high thermal eﬃ- ciency in the S-CO2 cycle (Moisseytsev and Sienicki, 2009). However, the operating pressure of the heat source of recompression cycle is still too high to promote its application in nuclear power plant. Especially, if the S-CO2 power cycle is directly coupled with reactor core, by using S- CO2 to cool the reactor core directly such as in the gas cooled fast re- actor. In this case the reactor vessel needs to bear more than 20 MPa, which increases the thickness of piping, as well as the thickness of the reactor vessel, thereby increasing the construction costs signiﬁcantly.
Furthermore, if the S-CO2 power cycle is indirectly coupled with the reactor core by using an intermediate exchanger (IHX) to transfer en- ergy, there will be an extremely high pressure diﬀerence between the sodium loop (0.1 MPa) and S-CO2 loop (20 MPa). The high pressure diﬀerence, high temperature operation (350 °C - 530 °C) and high ra- diation dose may pose a threat to the structural integrity of traditional shell-and-tube heat exchangers (IHX), especially for seal weld in tube- sheet joint. Printed Circuit Heat Exchangers (PCHE) are known for their very large heat transfer area to volume ratio and for tolerating high pressure, which is mainly used for gaseous heat transfer, such as high and low temperature recuperator (LTR/HTR) in S-CO2 cycle. PCHE is a potential candidate for the IHX. However, the PCHE still needs to withstand the high-pressure diﬀerence between the hot and cold ﬂows. Additionally, the IHX needs to withstand high irradiation dose. Al- though the eﬀect of irradiation on the structural integrity of IHX is beyond the scope of study, the high pressure diﬀerence can aggravate mechanical problem under high radiation dose obviously. The stress intensity range of PCHE body region should be less than 20 MPa for more than 34 years of service time (Lee and Lee, 2014). As a result, dual expansion technology with intercooling technology was studied for applications in the high-temperature gas-cooled fast reactor in which CO2 directly cooled reactor core. The 12.5 MPa is considered the maximum limit for the reactor vessel for gas-cooled fast reactors (Muto and Kato, 2007).
Although S-CO2 cycle can be used in conjunction with diﬀerent kinds of heat sources in direct cycle or indirect cycle, the high operating pressure of heat source is still too high to promote its application. This aim of this work is to reduce the operating pressure of heat source, in order to improve the integrity, safety and lifetime of the power cycle to expand its application. Sensitivity analysis of key parameters is also performed to obtain high cycle eﬃciency. In this work, a combined Recompression Cycle and Dual expansion turbine technology (RCD) is ﬁrst recommended to reduce the operating pressure of heat source of S- CO2 cycle, minimizing decreases in cycle eﬃciency. Sensitivity analysis is also performed for recompression cycle (RC), recompression cycle with dual expansion cycle (RCD) and modiﬁed recompression cycle (MRC) to obtain optimum design. The merits and faults for these lay- outs are described.
2.Model description
In this work, the code Thermoﬂex version 26 (part of Thermoﬂow) developed by Thermoﬂow company is used as the simulation tool for heat balance modeling. It has a graphical user interface (Thermoﬂow, 2016). Thermoﬂex handles both design and oﬀ-design simulations, in- cluding compressor, turbine, recuperator, heat exchanger and heat source, pipe, etc. The layouts of diﬀerent kinds of power cycles can be designed ﬂexibly and detailed parameters for components can be de- ﬁned, such as pressure ratio, isentropic eﬃciency, mechanical eﬃ- ciency, etc. It has been used as a professional analysis tool for the Brayton cycle and the Rankine cycle in previous studies (Andreades, 2015; Cheang et al., 2015; Rovense, 2015). This code employs RE- FPROP thermodynamic values for CO2 which is developed by National Institute of standards and Technology (NIST, 2014). The S-CO2 cycle of Advanced Fast Reactor -100 (AFR-100) is simulated by this code as reference case. Speciﬁcally, commercial software THERMOFLEX® is able to model S-CO2 cycles correctly because the results obtained agree well with the Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) predictions (Andreades, 2015). The minimum pressure and temperature is set close and   above   the  critical  point   of   CO2  (critical   point:   31.10 °C and
7.39 MPa) considering that the cycle can be operated and controlled without the temperature and pressure falling below the critical point that may cause system instabilities. The common parameters of three kinds of S-CO2 models are shown in Table 1 (Ahn and Lee, 2014; Sienicki et al., 2014) and detailed description of diﬀerences is shown in the following section. It is worth noting that since the detailed design of
Table 1
Common parameters of S-CO2 cycles in this work.
S-CO2 cycle has not been ﬁnished, the eﬀect of heat loss and pressure drop of components as well as pipes is not thoroughly considered except the eﬀect of the PCHEs pressure drops, which is studied in sensitivity analysis. The power cycle eﬃciency will decrease if those factors are taken into consideration. In other words, all cases in this work can be assumed as ideal cases. The real cases considering parasitic heat loss and pressure drop along pipes and components can be performed for commercial design, which is beyond this scope of study. However, the real cases could have about 2% reduction in cycle eﬃciency con- sidering the previously stated factors (Andreades, 2015).
2.1.Recompression cycle (RC)
As is shown in Fig. 1, the main characteristic of the recompression cycle is to contain a single main compressor and a single recompressing compressor, as well as the LTR and HTR. The CO2 ﬂow splits after the LTR, leaving one part of CO2 to go through the recompressing com- pressor without heat rejection in the cooler. This special design oﬀsets the diﬀerence in the speciﬁc heat of the high and lower pressure CO2 in the LTR, increasing the eﬀectiveness of LTR and reducing the heat re- jection from the cycle. As is shown in Fig. 1, a temperature-entropy diagram, a fraction of CO2 ﬂow is compressed to high pressure in the main compressor (points 1 - 2). Then the CO2 is preheated in the LTR (points 2 - 3). At point 4 it merges with the other CO2 ﬂow that is from the outlet of the recompressing compressor (points 9–2′) without heat rejection in the cooler. The merging ﬂow is further preheated in HTR (points 4 - 5). The IHX provides heat addition into this cycle (points 5 - 6). The CO2 expansion generates rotation energy and is converted to electricity generator (points 6 - 7). Then the CO2 is cooled in the HTR (points 7–8) and LTR (points 8 - 9), respectively. The CO2 ﬂow splits after LTF (point 9) and then one part goes through cooler (points 9–1). The remaining part is recompressed to high pressure in the recom- pressing compressor (points 9–2’). The following power cycles are based on modiﬁcation of RC, which have a similar design, involving two compressors. The RC design is simple from an engineering perspective with few components, simple pipe network and corresponding control strategy.
2.2.Recompression cycle with dual expansion cycle (RCD)
A combined Recompression Cycle and Dual expansion turbine technology (RCD) is ﬁrst recommended. As is shown in Fig. 2, there are two turbines in the system in order to reduce pressure diﬀerence of the IHX in an indirect heating loop or reduce reactor vessel pressure in a direct heating loop. The IHX is installed at the exit of the high-pressure main turbine. The CO2 expansion generates rotation energy in the main
reactor core causes approximately 1% reduction of thermal eﬃciency.
However, it reduces the thickness of piping, casing and exchange, which lowers the construction cost signiﬁcantly. Detailed cost analysis is beyond this scope of study for lack of commercial design. Further- more, since there is no experience for any current nuclear power plants to be operated above 15 MPa, the operating pressure is below 15 MPa that beneﬁts the licensing of using S-CO2 technology in nuclear industry because of the high operating pressure may reduce the lifetime of re- actor vessel considering irradiation eﬀect. As a result, the traditional RC design needs above 20 MPa operating pressure for reactor core may pose higher threat to the safety issue and obviously may impede the licensing issue.
However, due to the limitation of the pressure ratio of second low- pressure turbine, the minimal operating pressure of the heat source can be 9.2 MPa for direct heating loop (46% pressure reduction). Although two turbines in the loop may complicate control strategy, this power cycle is still as simple as RC, which is a promising and feasible design for commercial use.
2.3.Modiﬁed recompression cycle (MRC)
Another design is a modiﬁed design of RC (MRC), in which the IHX is still installed at the exit of high-pressure main turbine but the second low-pressure turbine is removed (Fig. 3). The thermodynamic process of MRC is the same as RC except that the heat addition happens (points 6–7) after CO2 expansion work in turbine (points 5–6). As a result, the high-pressure side of the IHX can be decreased to 7.7 MPa, which is far less than most of current pressure limit of nuclear design components. However, this design makes the heat duty of the HTR increase by 47% and UA increase by 20%. The outlet pressure of the turbine in the MRC cannot be as easily adjusted as it can in the RCD, because inlet pressure of the compressor is ﬁxed closely at the critical point of CO2. The cycle eﬃciency of the MCR is 41.36%, which is lower than RC and RCD but the complexity of system is still simple.
3.Results and discussion
The sensitivity analysis of the RC, RCD and MRC are performed in terms of ﬂow split ratio, turbine inlet pressure (maximum pressure) and temperature, IHX outlet temperature (maximum temperature), turbine eﬃciency, compressor eﬃciency, compressor inlet temperature, turbine split ratio, PCHE thermal eﬀectiveness and PCHE pressure drop.
3.1.Sensitivity analysis for compressor parameter
The compressor inlet temperature is the minimum temperature in the loop. For the original design of AFR-100 power cycle, the com- pressor inlet pressure is ﬁxed at 7.7 MPa and the main compressor ﬂow split ratio is set at 0.68. The compressor work ratio is deﬁned as the Fig. 1. AFR-100 recompression cycle layout (a) and temperature-entropy diagram (b).
ratio of compression work (shaft power) to the turbine work (shaft power). It is shown in Fig. 4 that when the inlet temperature ap- proaches the critical point of CO2, the cycle eﬃciency reaches its peak value. It is shown in Fig. 4 that the turbine work increases faster than that of compression work before the critical point, although the com- pression work increases with the growth of compressor inlet tempera- ture caused by reduction of CO2 density at inlet of compressor (Fig. 5). If the state point of CO2 is far above the critical point, the density of CO2 will be low and the compressor will consumes more shaft power. This cycle then becomes similar to the common helium Brayton cycle with higher compression work. Consequently, the cooler should be designed in such a way that the inlet temperature of the compressor can be
controlled carefully, in order to avoid high compression work. As shown in Fig. 4, it is important to note that the cycle eﬃciency of the RC is highest and the cycle eﬃciency of the RCD is close to RC. The MRC has a larger reduction of cycle eﬃciency.
As is shown in Fig. 6, the pressure aﬀects the thermal properties of CO2 signiﬁcantly. From Fig. 7, when the compressor inlet pressure approaches the critical point, the power cycle eﬃciency increases be- cause the density of CO2 increases dramatically, causing the compres- sion work to decrease. When the pressure is around 7.6 MPa, the eﬃ- ciency of power cycle is highest. Also, when the pressure is below
7.6 MPa, the eﬀect of compressor inlet pressure on the power cycle eﬃciency  is  signiﬁcant  and  the  increase  of  cycle  eﬃciency  is  in Fig. 2. AFR-100 recompression with dual expansion cycle layout (a) and temperature-entropy diagram (b).
proportion to the growth of compressor inlet pressure. When the pressure is above the 8.0 MPa, the power cycle eﬃciency decreases gradually with the increase of compressor inlet pressure. The current inlet pressure is set at 7.7 MPa, the corresponding power cycle eﬃ- ciencies are 43.88% (RC), 43.11% (RCD) and 41.35% (MRC),respec- tively.
In this study, the compressor eﬃciency is mainly determined by isentropic eﬃciency. Fig. 8 shows cycle eﬃciency versus compressor isentropic eﬃciency. The increase of cycle eﬃciency is nearly propor- tional to the increase of compressor eﬃciency. It is known that small turbomachine size results in reduction of isentropic eﬃciencies (about 5%) (Ahn and Lee, 2014). However, it is shown in Fig. 8 that the eﬀect of compressor eﬃciency on cycle eﬃciency is limited. 10% increase in
compressor eﬃciency leads to minimal growth of cycle eﬃciency by 1.6%.
3.2.Sensitivity analysis for turbine parameter
The maximum pressure in the loop is the main turbine inlet pres- sure. A higher turbine inlet pressure needs more compression work, but can also generate more shaft power for electric output. Fig. 9 represents a tradeoﬀ between compression work and turbine shaft power. The highest cycle eﬃciencies are 45.46%, 44.28%, 42.64%  for  27 MPa  of RC, 26 MPa of RCD, 24 MPa of MRC, respectively. When maximum pressure in the loop is above 19 MPa, 5 MPa increase in turbine inlet pressure brings about 1.52%, 1.2%, 1.65% increases of cycle eﬃciency Fig. 3. AFR-100 modiﬁed recompression cycle layout (a) and temperature-entropy diagram (b).
for RC, RCD and MRC, respectively. The 5 MPa increase in turbine inlet pressure implies signiﬁcantly higher cost of components because of the requirement for thicker piping, casing and heat exchange. Conse- quently, the beneﬁts of higher turbine inlet pressure vanish. However, detailed cost analysis is beyond this scope of study, but the cycle eﬃ- ciency also decreases when turbine inlet pressure is above optimum point (Fig. 9). After the optimum point, the compression work increases more than that of turbine work.
The maximum temperature in the loop is the IHX outlet tempera- ture. It is shown from Fig. 10 that cycle eﬃciency increases almost proportionally to the increase of IHX outlet temperature. When the maximum temperature increases by 100 °C, cycle eﬃciencies increase by 4.73%, 4.85%, 5.11% for RC, RCD and MRC, respectively. Conse- quently, increasing the reactor outlet temperature and corresponding IHX outlet temperature is the most straightforward method to increase cycle eﬃciency without further complicated modiﬁcation of power
Fig. 4. Cycle eﬃciency and compressor work ratio versus compressor inlet temperature.
Fig. 5. CO2 density versus temperature at diﬀerent pressure.
Fig. 6. CO2 density versus pressure at diﬀerent temperature.
Fig. 7. Cycle eﬃciency versus compressor inlet pressure.
cycle. In this work, since the reactor core outlet temperature is 550 °C, the maximum IHX outlet temperature is limited. However, this feature demonstrates that S-CO2 cycle is quite suitable for high temperature energy source.
Turbine eﬃciency is also mainly determined by isentropic eﬃ- ciency. Fig. 11 shows cycle eﬃciency versus turbine eﬃciency. The turbine eﬃciency has a direct eﬀect on the total power cycle eﬃciency because turbine generates shaft power directly for electric power gen- eration. 5% increase in turbine eﬃciency causes cycle eﬃciency to increase by 1.7%, which doubles the eﬀect of compressor eﬃciency on the cycle eﬃciency.
There are two turbines in the design of RCD, in which two turbines inlet pressure should be properly determined. In this work, the turbine split ratio is deﬁned as the ratio of the inlet pressure of second turbine (low pressure turbine) to the inlet pressure of ﬁrst turbine (high pres- sure turbine). In other words, this ratio illustrates the percentage re- duction of the reactor outlet pressure or the IHX pressure that can be achieved by using RCD design. In terms of the main turbine inlet pressure (maximum pressure in the loop), three pressures are studied,
Fig. 8. Cycle eﬃciency versus compressor eﬃciency.
namely 15 MPa, 20 MPa, 25 MPa. The second turbine outlet pressure depends on compressor inlet pressure and it is at 7.7 MPa for current work. As is shown in Fig. 12, the increase in the turbine split ratio gives rise to the growth of cycle eﬃciency and makes the design of RCD gradually similar to that of the RC design. The growth of the turbine split ratio reduces the compressor work ratio, which in turn increases cycle eﬃciency. However, the high turbine split ratio means the IHX needs to withstand high pressure and the beneﬁts of the RCD design vanish. When the ﬁrst turbine inlet pressure is ﬁxed at 20 MPa, a 0.5 and 0.75 split ratio corresponds to 10 MPa and 15 MPa for the second turbine inlet pressure (or reactor outlet pressure in direct loop), re- spectively. The 5 MPa growth of second turbine inlet pressure only causes the cycle eﬃciency to increase by 1.1%. In other words, the RCD design can reduce the operating pressure of heat source by 25%–50% at the expense of cycle eﬃciency reduction ranging from 1% to 2%. However, due to the limitation of the expansion ratio of turbine (1.2), the available range of the inlet pressure of the second turbine is limited.
3.3.Sensitivity analysis for ﬂow split ratio
The main parameters of the cycle are kept the same as that of the reference case except for the ﬂow split ratio. The ﬂow split ratio is
Fig. 9. Cycle eﬃciency versus main turbine inlet pressure.
Fig. 10. Cycle eﬃciency versus IHX outlet temperature.
Fig. 11. Cycle eﬃciency versus turbine eﬃciency.
Fig. 12. Cycle eﬃciency and compressor work ratio versus turbine split ratio.
Fig. 13. Cycle eﬃciency and merging point temperature versus CO2 ﬂow split ratio.
deﬁned as the ratio of mass ﬂow rate going through main compressor to that of total mass ﬂow rate. Fig. 13 shows the dependency of ﬂow split ratio on cycle eﬃciency. High split ratio means more ﬂow goes through main compressor, causing the cycle eﬃciency to decrease. Low split ratio means more ﬂow goes through the recompressing compressor without heat rejection, causing high compression work and low cycle eﬃciency. As a result, there exist optimum ﬂow split ratios for each kinds of power cycle. The CO2 split ﬂow compensates the signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the speciﬁc heat of the high and low pressure CO2 ﬂows in the LTR, which in turn increases eﬀectiveness of the LTR. Since three kinds of power cycles employ the same recompression design, the eﬀect of ﬂow split ratio on cycle eﬃciency is quite similar. With optimum split ratio, the ideal cycle eﬃciencies can achieve are 44.19%, 43.52%, 41.48% for RC, RCD and MRC, respectively. Fig. 13 shows the de- pendency of ﬂow split ratio upon merging point temperature. The merging point is located at the outlet of the recompressing compressor. The temperature diﬀerence at the merging point can cause thermal striping phenomena, which may induce thermal fatigue problem (Lee et al., 2009). The temperature diﬀerence is relatively small when the split ratio ranges from 0.5 to 0.7. Detailed analysis for mitigating thermal fatigue eﬀect by optimizing ﬂow split ratio is worth further study.
Fig. 14 shows that when the ﬂow split ratio increases, the total mass ﬂow rate decreases. Less mass ﬂow rate causes less turbine work. The compressor work ratio is deﬁned as the ratio of total compression work to the turbine work. It can be seen from Fig. 14 that for S-CO2 cycle, when the ﬂow split ratio increases, the compressor work ratio de- creases. If the ﬂow split ratio is approximately below 0.6, the
Fig. 14. The eﬀect of ﬂow split ratio on the key parameters of power cycle.
compressor work ratio decreases more than the turbine work, causing the growth of cycle eﬃciency. If the ﬂow split ratio becomes 1.0, the RC cycle becomes a simple recuperated Brayton cycle and the cycle eﬃ- ciency is lowest. From Figs. 13 and 14, the optimum range of ﬂow split ratio is from 0.5 to 0.7.
3.4.Sensitivity analysis for PCHE parameter
The supercritical CO2 cycle requires highly eﬃcient recuperators, since the recuperated heat is about twice as much as reactor heat output. The advantage conferred by extremely compact turbo- machinery could be oﬀset by excessively large volume heat exchanger unless PCHE units are adopted, which are compact with a high thermal eﬃciency (Dostal et al., 2004). The utilization of other compact or shell and tube heat exchangers for S-CO2 cycle is not feasible and they lead to large volume of units. The cycle eﬃciency could be dramatically in- creased by increasing the size (heat transfer area) of heat exchangers as well as number of stages in the turbomachinery. However, the capital cost of the cycle with such large components would signiﬁcantly exceed that of a Rankine steam cycle regardless of beneﬁts of higher thermal eﬃciency. The selection of the component sizes should be made based on the tradeoﬀ between the capital cost of the components and the beneﬁts in terms of the higher eﬃciency (Moisseytsev and Sienicki, 2009). This work studies the eﬀect of heat transfer area and pressure drop.
In this work, UA is the sum value of LTR, HTR and cooler, which indicates the total potential volume of heat exchanger component. The cycle eﬃciency increases with an increase of PCHE thermal eﬀective- ness. The higher the thermal eﬃciency is, the larger the UA is required. The UA increases signiﬁcantly, although the cycle eﬃciency increases slower when the thermal eﬀectiveness is above 0.85 (Fig. 15). In order
Fig. 15. The eﬀect of PCHE thermal eﬀectiveness.
Fig. 16. The eﬀect of PCHE pressure drop multiplier.
Table 2
Reference rough pressure drop for key components.
to meet high cycle eﬃciency, the PCHE thermal eﬀectiveness should be above 95%. However, the construction cost increases dramatically if the traditional shell and tube heat exchanger is used because of lower heat transfer area density (120 m2/m3). PCHE has higher heat transfer area density (2500 m2/m3), which can meet the higher requirement of S-CO2 cycle. Although the pressure diﬀerence of the IHX can be reduced, the MRC cycle and RCD cycle require more UA than that of RC cycle. The total size of the PCHE of the MRC cycle and RCD cycle are increased approximately by 12%, 3% respectively when compared with that of RC cycle at the target of 95% thermal eﬃciency of PCHE (Fig. 15).
Since the extremely compact PCHE is adopted, the cycle pressure drop may increase correspondingly. Consequently, it is necessary to consider whether this pressure drop can reduce the total cycle eﬃ- ciency signiﬁcantly. In particular, the pressure drop eﬀect of the PCHE (e.g. HTR, LTR and cooler) on the total thermal eﬃciency is considered.
0.05 MPa  is suggested  for each exchanger  except  for IHXNa-co2, where
0.15 MPa   has   been  set   (Pérez-Pichel   et  al.,   2012).   0.035 MPa and
0.07 MPa is suggested for pressure drop of low pressure side and high pressure side of PCHE, respectively (Cheang et al., 2015). The detailed pressure drop needs results from experiment or CFD. Consequently, the reference pressure drops are shown in Fig. 16.
Fig. 16 shows the PCHE pressure drop multiplier based on reference values in Table 2. The increase of the PCHE pressure drop causes the cycle eﬃciency to decrease because of growth of the compression work. However, the eﬀect of the PCHE pressure drop on cycle eﬃciency is limited. The increase of pressure drop by ﬁve times leads to the de- crease of cycle eﬃciency by 2.72%, 2.82% and 2.84% for RC, RCD and MRC, respectively.
4.Conclusion
The operating pressure of heat source can be dramatically decreased by using alternative cycle design, namely S-CO2 RCD and S-CO2 MRC. The RCD design can reduce the heat source operating pressure by 25%–50% without signiﬁcant reduction of cycle eﬃciency. Although the MRC design can achieve the lowest operating pressure of the heat source, cycle eﬃciency is sacriﬁced signiﬁcantly. Additionally, the MRC design has largest recuperator size. Sensitivity analysis of the RC, RCD
-
With optimum ﬂow split ratio (from 0.5 to 0.7) for the main com- pressor, the cycle eﬃciency can achieve peak value with small temperature diﬀerence at the merging point.
-Cycle eﬃciency also decreases when turbine inlet pressure is above optimum point; the maximum temperature aﬀects cycle eﬃciency almost in a linearly proportional way.
-The eﬀect of turbine eﬃciency on the cycle eﬃciency doubles the eﬀect of compressor on eﬃciency. The high turbine split ratio achieves high cycle eﬃciency but the beneﬁts of RCD gradually vanish.
-The S-CO2 power cycle needs extremely large heat transfer areas for the recuperator and the cooler. Furthermore, compared with RC cycle, the total size of the PCHE of the MRC cycle and the RCD cycle are increased approximately by 12% and 3% respectively. Also, the eﬀect of the PCHE pressure drop on cycle eﬃciency is limited.
-The RCD power cycle is also helpful for expanding the application of S-CO2 cycle for other kinds of heat sources for relative low operating pressure.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11705058, 11705059, 11635005, 51306057). Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2016ZZD05) and Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2162040) are also grateful. The authors thanks Zhengyu Huang from Thermoﬂow Inc for technical support. The authors thanks Charalampos Andreades and Lakshana Huddar for helpful discussions.
