<title>Lithographic Printing Via Two-Photon Polymerization of Engineered Foams</title>
<Affiliation>a.John Oertel,b and Brian M. Pattersona
a.Los Alamos National Laboratory, Materials Science and Technology Division, P.O. Box 1663, MS E549,
Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545
b.Los Alamos National Laboratory, Physics Division, P.O. Box 1663, MS E549, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545</Affiliation>
<author>Matthew J. Herman, Dominic Peterson, Kevin Henderson, Tana Cardenas, Christopher E. Hamilton, John Oertel & Brian M. Patterson</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1387454</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1387454</URL>
Abstract — Understanding deuterium-tritium mix in capsules is critical to achieving fusion within inertial confined fusion experiments. One method of understanding how the mix of hydrogen fuels can be controlled is by creating various structured deuterated foams and filling the capsule with liquid tritium. Historically, these materials have been a stochastically structured gas-blown foam. Later, to improve the uniformity of this material, pore formers have been used which are then chemically removed, leaving behind a foam of monodisperse voids. However, this technique is still imperfect in that fragments of the pore templating particles may not be completely removed and the void distribution may not be uniform over the size scale of the capsule. Recently, advances in three-dimensional printing suggest that it can be used to create microlattices and capsule walls in one single print. Demonstrated here are proof-of-concept microlattices produced using two-photon polymerization with submicrometer resolution of various structures as well as a microlattice-containing capsule. With this technology, complete control of the mixing structure is possible, amenable to modeling and easily modified for tailored target design.
Keywords — Engineered foams, two-photon polymerization, additive manufacturing.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
In the recently developed MARBLE experimental platform,1 capsules are utilized with interior foam struc- tures. These structures are used to control burn by vary- ing the foam cell size, thus varying the degree in which the foam and gas are mixed. The physics requirements for these structures require creating foams with controlled morphologies. Advances through novel synthesis, hand- ling, machining, and characterization are beginning to lead to engineered structures suitable for model develop- ment. Correspondingly, advances in characterizing these foams allows scientists to understand the metrology,density, and three-dimensional (3-D) tomographic struc- ture, producing quantification metrics such as void size, shape, distribution, and ligament thickness, in addition to the quantification of any manufacturing issues (e.g., gaps, inclusions).2 Requirements often include specific, even graded densities, in unique geometries (e.g., spherical).
Traditional foam systems used for support and posi- tioning in inertial confined fusion (ICF) targets are sto- chastic in nature. As a result of their manufacturing, these foams have a natural random structure and can often vary in properties from batch to batch, making efforts in mod- eling and certification of materials difficult. Typical foams are styrene cross-linked with divinylbenzene (DVB). DVB aerogel is prepared using a sol-gel process;this material has pore sizes on the order of 200 to 500 nm. High internal phase emulsion (HIPE) foams are made via an emulsion of styrene/DVB/surfactant and water/catalyst solution and pore sizes are ~1 to 5 μm with occasional random voids as large as 250 µm in diameter. The ran- dom voids, caused by inclusion of air in the emulsion during mixing, vary from batch to batch in an unpredict- able manner. The MARBLE platform requires hierarchi- cal porosity. Large templated pores are achieved by mixing the sol-gel or emulsion with silica microballoons of the desired size before polymerization. These balloons are then chemically removed before supercritical drying to make the hierarchical aerogel.3 Each of these foam types are then machined to size and shape, a time con- suming and costly top-down process requiring large amounts of material to create enough parts for a single shot. Due to the preparation to machine and shape these foams and their stochastic nature, there is no guarantee that they will have consistent morphology or properties. The foams are typically machined in larger-than-needed batches due to scrapping of out-of-specification samples after characterization.4 Additive manufacturing techni- ques could allow materials and structures to be engi- neered, creating foam systems with controlled structures and properties, with no machining requirement.
Two-photon   polymerization  (TPP)   and  the  typical
polymer chemistries used are well-established technologies which offer both the control and resolution necessary for the production of 3-D polymer geometries.5,6 These poly- mer geometries can then be functionalized7 or coated8–11 allowing for the creation of new materials which are unachievable by traditional manufacturing. TPP manufac- turing is driven by pulsing a diffraction-limited laser into a volume of photosensitive polymer resin. Taking advantage of the two-photon absorption effect, the print volume is restricted to a subdiffraction limit area. A voxel (volume pixel), typically ~100 nm in width perpendicular with the beam with an aspect ratio of 3:1, is scanned through the photosensitive resin system creating a 3-D structure.12–14 The part volume of structures manufactured using tradi- tional lithography is limited by the finite working distance of the microscope objective and the discrepancy between the index of refraction between the glass substrate and the polymer resin. While this printing configuration is good at testing a prototype resin system by avoiding direct contact of the experimental resin with the objective, parts typically are limited to only tens of micrometers in overall height. In order to meet the size requirements of modern ICF target foams, the Dip-in lithography configuration is required. This lithography configuration allows for the microscope objective to be immersed in an optical-index matched– polymer resin system, and prints directly onto the substrate or   prepolymerized   material,   eliminating   the   index of
refection mismatch developed by passing the laser through the glass substrate. Furthermore, by controlling the dis- tance of the microscope objective to the glass substrate with the piezo stage or microscope turret, the limitation on part volume created by the working distance of the objec- tive is effectively eliminated. This allows for the creation of large, typically 1- to 2-mm-thick, 3-D polymer parts with submicrometer feature resolution perfectly suited to the creation of engineered polymer foam systems.
This paper will demonstrate the progression from sto- chastic to semi-ordered, and finally to highly ordered 3-D printed lattices and their inclusion within capsules. To char- acterize these structures, electron microscopy and X-ray tomography are used to measure void quality and distribu- tion, as well as lattice ligament thickness and spacing.
II.EXPERIMENTAL
The Nanoscribe Photonics Professional GT (Nanoscribe GmbH, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany) used for this work utilizes a Toptica-made, erbium-doped fiber femtosecond laser at 780 nm focused into a ultraviolet-sensitive resin system. This process relies on the simultaneous absorption of two individual photons only possible at the extreme focal point of the laser, allowing for resolutions below the diffraction limit of the optical objective used to focus the laser; as low as 100-nm voxel resolution. This voxel is then rastered through the polymer resin using a galvo-mirror system, building a 3-D part by selectively polymerizing material within the print volume. This commercial system allows for the direct input of designs generated in computer- aided design (CAD) software (Autodesk Inventor Professional, Solidworks, etc.) or programmed in other third-party software (MATLAB, nTopology, etc.). With this technique, the direct design and control of submic- rometer morphology of the printed polymer parts is pos- sible. The two available printing methodologies using the Photonics Professional GT are traditional lithography and Dip-in lithography. This has been used to create unique foam systems, such as gradient density parts, by building log-pile structures using single-voxel-width elements.
The structures  developed in this work were  designed
using a variety of CAD and postprocessing software. Simple, single-voxel-width, stack-log-pile structures were programed using Nanoscribe’s proprietary control software DeScribe using a simple loop variation to change density between print layers. More complex geometries used a combination of Autodesk Professional/Solidworks, to cre- ate a 3-D volume, and nTopology, a third-party software, to
create complex lattice systems within a predefined part volume. All CAD-defined geometries were then processed using DeScribe and printed. After printing, all samples, while still connected to their glass substrate, were bathed in propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate for 30 min, followed by a rinse in isopropyl alcohol for 15 min to remove excess liquid monomer from the polymerized mate- rials. After cleaning, excess isopropyl alcohol is allowed to evaporate with no concern given to the foams collapsing because they are rigid and self-supporting.
Parts manufactured using the commercial TPP instrument during this work were printed using the  Dip-in lithography methods. The complex lattice and foam materials used a 63× optical objective using  IP-DIP, a proprietary acrylate  resin  system  developed by Nanoscribe. Dip-in lithography  was  required  in order to meet the total part size requirements of the MARBLE experimental platform. Part manufacturing times averaged between 10 and 48 h depending on the total volume of polymerized material.
The capsules were imaged with a (Carl Zeiss X-ray Microscopy Inc., Pleasanton, California) micro–computed tomography (CT). The conditions include 20× objective, 1-mm field of view, 1.07-μm-voxel size, 40 kVp and 10 W on the tungsten source. Due to the small, 1-μm thickness of the lattice ligaments within the capsule, a portion of it was also imaged in situ using a UltraXRM nano-CT, also from Carl Zeiss. The sample was imaged with the large-field-of- view (65 µm), Zernike-phase contrast modality, producing a voxel size at the sample of 65 nm and a measured spatial resolution of ~150 nm. All of the images were rendered and analyzed with Avizo Fire (FEI, Hillsboro, Oregon). The capsule voids were segmented and quantified, and a histo- gram plot of the void size was plotted.
Images were taken of the 3-D printed lattices using a
Philips XL30-F scanning electron microscope (SEM). Before imaging, all samples were lightly sputter-coated with gold to reduce charging effects typical of polymeric materials under the electron beam. Typical imaging con- ditions were 5 keV from a tungsten field emission source, and the images were collected in secondary electron mode. Optical images were collected using a Keyence VHX-6000 series digital microscope, taking advantage of the real-time depth composition feature to capture foam images with greater depth of field.
III.RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 1 shows the reconstructed slice of a stochastic foam within a capsule. The gas evolution in the polymer
Fig. 1. Reconstructed micro–X-ray tomographic slice of  a DVB foam–filled capsule. The stochastic structure of the foam is fully apparent. Additionally, the seam between the two hemispheric foam pieces is  visible  from approximately 2 to 7 o’clock.
opens pores of random location and random size. Limited control of the morphology is possible except through the reaction rate. Therefore, characterization of the foam both before and after machining is required to find regions within the bulk foam of suitable morphology. Additionally, damage may occur to the foam during machining and assembly, therefore characterization of  the material must be performed on many more samples than are required for the target request. Even then, the samples chosen are of materials that appear within the specifications for the shot.
X-ray CT can be used to measure the distribution to within the resolution of the instrument (~3 to 4 μm) and provides the experimenter with a precise structure of the foam for modeling. Figure 2 shows the reconstructed slice of a syntactic foam in which 50-μm-diameter glass beads were mixed into the polymer during  curing.  Figure 2b shows the full volume rendering of the foam with the voids colored  by  equivalent  diameter  with  Fig. 2c plotting the distribution of voids within foams filled with 45-µm voids. The histogram of the voids shows that the voids have an average full-width  half- max distribution of approximately 6 µm. The main drawback, in addition to the handling and machining requirements previously mentioned, is that the locations
Fig. 2. (a) Reconstructed slice of a DVB-filled, syntactic glass microbead pore former foam within a capsule. (b) A full-volume rendering of a subregion of the voids from the center of the capsule, colored by their equivalent diameter. (c) Plot of the histographic analysis of the void sizes within a cropped-down, rectangular area of the foam where incomplete voids were removed. The voids are ~45 µm in diameter.
of the void centers are not controlled and the likelihood of the beads breaking during mixing is very high, which leads to voids that are the shape of a broken shell.
The design CAD software (Solidworks, Autodesk Inventor, etc.) and especially software designed for lattice development (nTopology) can  be  used to design foams and lattices. Using DeScribe, simple  foam structures containing only ligaments printed orthogonally to the support surface and  containing  only two planes of variation (Fig. 3) can be created. These foams can be uniform or contain quantized variation of mechanical performance. These foams demonstrate density change as a step function follow- ing the z-axis of the material. Nanoscribe printing geometry allows target engineers to design foams without support structures with micrometer features. Variations in ligament size and spacing can be easily
programmed. This flexibility allows for lattice struc- tures to be printed from full density down to theore- tical densities as low as 1 mg/cm3. An example of a designed foam lattice can be seen in Fig. 4. No  handling of the foam is required except the removal from the glass printing substrate.  Designing  foams with nonsquare geometries  are  possible,  removing  the need to machine the foam and decreasing the likelihood of damaging the foams.
Because the foams are printed suspended within the viscus polymer, ligaments that are not orthogonal to the print direction are possible. The CAD model of a capsule containing a hexagonal lattice structure designed in Solidworks (Fig. 5) was directly imported into DeScribe as a stereolithography (STL) file and printed. The capsule was printed, intentionally missing 1/8 of the capsule wall, for SEM imaging (Fig. 5). The micro-CT image (Fig. 6)
Fig. 3. (a) and (b) Scaleless CAD rendering and (c) and (d) SEM images of variable-density log-pile structures printed using the NanoScribe 2PP instrument, demonstrating the control possible on the micrometer scale of the 3-D structure.
Fig. 4. Optical images of the foam structure with a true 3-D designed structure. The ligaments are not orthogonal to the build direction, in this case at a 45-deg angle. 3-D printing opens up design space to create foams of virtually any structure.
Fig. 5. (a) CAD rendering and (b) SEM image of a capsule printed with an interior lattice structure. One-eighth of the surface was not printed for SEM imaging. The CAD rendering is scale independent; once the STL file is created, the capsule can be printed at any size.
shows that the lattice is continuous and connected to the inner surface of the capsule wall. The thickness of the ligaments cannot be measured and rendered accurately since their thickness is approximately the resolution of  the micro-CT instrument. The in situ nano-CT image (Fig. 7) of the material indicates that the ligaments are highly uniform and constant in thickness. Due to the phase-effects at the edge, their precise thickness cannot  be measured. Future work will include doping the resin with a higher z-contrast agent, which may allow for imaging the lattice in absorption contrast and will improve the precision of measuring the lattice ligament thickness.15
IV.CONCLUSIONS
As requirements continue to increase in the level of target design and control, the progression of foam-filled capsules from stochastic to highly engineered structures is paramount. Control on the microscale is required to meet the needs of physicists. Templating the foams with a pore former gives further control to the void sizes, but it does not control their distribution, and remnants of the pore former can diminish the quality of the physics data. The initial steps, shown here, show that through controlled synthesis
Fig. 6. 3-D micro-tomographic rendering of the capsule shown in Fig. 5. A virtual slice was taken from the surface to better visualize the interior lattice. Because  the resolution of the image is approximately 3 to 4 µm and the ligaments are ~5 µm in thickness, the lattice structure is rendered with large thickness variations. See Fig. 7 for a higher-resolution image.
Fig. 7. Cross-sectional, nano-CT reconstructed slice of the lattice structure inside the subvolume of  the  cap- sule shown in Fig. 6. The phase contrast image, with a 50-nm-voxel size, clearly illustrates the quality of the ligaments and their uniform structure. Unfortunately, phase contrast image creates artifacts (light and dark edges in the image) that reduce the ability to collect accurate thickness measurements, but the ligaments are approximately 5 µm thick.
we can create foams of stochastic structure for insertion into capsules. The efficiency in creating and tailoring the structure is pushing target fabricators into the area of 3-D printing. Historically, controlling the structure has been minimal, but 3-D printing allows for the control of the structure, not just to react to the as-synthesized material. Through 3-D printing, it is now becoming possible to completely control the foam structure, density, and liga- ment size, and then to build the foams to the required tolerances. Characterizing these structures with electron and X-ray microscopy both at the material selection and assembly-build stages provides a clear picture of the as- built target. Future work, including demonstrations of var- ious foam properties, densities (both uniform and graded), and the development  of  other,  more  applicable  resins (e. g., polystyrene) will further add tools to the physicists’ toolbox for laser experiments.
