<title>Measurement of dead time by time interval distribution method</title>
<Affiliation>a.Reactor Research School, Nuclear Science & Technology Research Institute (NSTRI), P.O. Box 14395-836, Tehran, Iran
b.Radiation Applications Research School, Nuclear Science & Technology Research Institute (NSTRI), P.O. Box 14395-836, Tehran, Iran</Affiliation>
<author>Mohammad Arkani , Gholamreza Raisali </author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2014.11.069</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2014.11.069</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Non-random event losses due to dead time effect in nuclear radiation detection systems distort the original Poisson process into a new type of distribution. As the characteristics of the distribution depend on physical properties of the detection system, it is possible to estimate the dead time parameters based on time interval analysis, this is the problem investigated in this work. A BF3 ionization chamber is taken as a case study to check the validity of the method in experiment. The results are compared with the data estimated by power rising experiment performed in Esfahan Heavy Water Zero Power Reactor (EHWZPR). Using Monte Carlo simulation, the problem is elaborately studied and useful range for counting rates of the detector is determined. The proposed method is accurate and applicable for all kinds of radiation detectors with no potential difﬁculty and no need for any especial nuclear facility. This is not a time consuming method and advanced capability of online examination during normal operation of the detection system is possible.
Keywords:
Dead time
Nuclear radiation detector Poisson process
Time interval distribution
1.Introduction
Nuclear radiation interactions with matter are stochastic. Depending on the system properties, stochastic ﬂuctuations of the data measured by nuclear radiation detection systems contain important information describing the nature of the system. For detection systems working at low intensities of radiations, single particle detection is possible based on pulse mode operation. The data available by pulse mode operation of nuclear detection systems includes two important statistical information types, time dependent information, and radiation energy dependent informa- tion [1]. The time dependent data is measured as time interval distribution of the pulses. The energy dependent data is also measured as pulse height spectrum. Every detection instrument used for counting single rays or particles exhibits a characteristic time constant having the nature of a recovery time. After recording one pulse, the counter is unresponsive to the successive pulses until a time interval equal to or greater than its resolving time has elapsed. This time is known not only to cause a loss of counts but also to distort the counting statistics. Since this topic is important to the experimenters in radiological science and in physics, efforts to understand the effects of dead time have long been made, and understanding of them has progressed by renewal theory [2,3] and operational calculus. The counting losses introduced by the dead time are a systematic error in counting measurements. Correction of dead time losses must be taken into account when the loss rate is signiﬁcant. In stochastic experimental physics, like zero power reactor noise, use of pulse mode detectors is restricted to measure- ments in a low counting range because dead time distorts the measured values of correlation that is crucially important in the analysis. When the measurement methods are applied to systems with strong radiation source, this restriction becomes serious. Therefore, modiﬁcations on data treatment might be employed to tolerate the effect of dead time on the results [4–6]. Determination of counting rate losses in quantitative and qualitative analysis is a vital step for correction of experimental data. Therefore, compen- sating for counting rate losses is of great importance. These counting rate losses are due to piled up reject time, extendable or non-extendable system dead time or a combination of these mechanisms. Extendable and non-extendable models are well known and frequently used for correction of counting rate losses depending on the system behaviour [1,7,8]. Efforts have been carried out to make these models more efﬁcient [9–11].
Popular deterministic methods of dead time estimation are two source, source-decaying, and power rising methods. The common aim of all is to anticipate the true counting rates of the detector by measuring the observed counting rates at different levels of radia- tion intensities. Then, the dead time is determined by making in use of an appropriate dead time model. Note that radiation intensity of the source should be in a proper range to realise the effect of dead time on the detector response. Besides deterministic methods, VTM experiment as a stochastic alternative method of dead time estima- tion is proposed by the literature. For a Poisson process, the variance and mean values are the same, while for a distorted  distribution, they are different. Muller et al. [7,12] has derived rigorous and asymptotic formulae for the expectation and the variance of counts  in different time-gates.1 Application and experimental checks on the analytical formulas are examined elsewhere [13,14].
In radiation studies, it is commonly accepted that the process of radioactive disintegration is adequately described by the Poisson distribution. Independence and stationary are the essential proper- ties of a physical process obeying Poisson statistics. Nevertheless, for cases when λT≳1, the condition of stationary is not satisﬁed. A PDF is derived by Matthews [15] which describes the process of radioactive disintegration where the only fundamental property is indepen- dence called the Ruark–Devol distribution. In the present work, it is assumed that the two essential properties of the physical process are satisﬁed. The process is stationery, a decaying source with a very  long half-life (in comparison with the observation time), and the random events are independent.
Dead time distortion on Poisson process is studied by published literature. The typical measurement of time interval distributions and analytical formulas have been studied [12,16–19]. As the character- istics of the distortion depends on the type of count losses, in this work, an investigation is carried out to introduce a general method of dead time estimation based on time interval analysis. A BF3 neutron detector is taken as a case study to apply and to validate the method experimentally. The data is measured by a digital time interval analyser [20]. Then using MATLAB software [21] by means of a powerful software engineering tool, the data is analysed.  The  true and observed counting rates are calculated resulting the dead time estimation of the chamber. To check the validity of the results, power rising experiment was performed in EHWZPR [22]. The Monte Carlo method is employed to evaluate and to compare the distorted and original Poisson processes and to investigate the useful rate range of appropriate counting rate of the detector for the purpose. The structure of the present paper is  organised  as follow;  in Section  2, the theory of power rising experiment is reviewed. The experimental set-up and the results of the measurements are also explained. In Section 3, some description on distorted Poisson process is given. The experimental set-up and the results are also illuminated. Section 4, considers the dead time distortion on Poisson process by means of Monte Carlo simulation. Section 5 discusses the results and compares them. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 6.
2.Power rising experiment
One of standard methods of dead time estimation of neutron detectors is power rising experiment. As behaviour of neutron population in a nuclear reactor core is well-known by point kinetic equations (an exponential behaviour after positive step input reactivity), the true counting rates of the detector might be anticipated. Details about reactor dynamics are published in the literature [23]. Injection of a positive step input reactivity, drive   the reactor in a dynamic transient state described by Eq. (1):
@1
For a positive reactivity, all ωj, except ω1, are negative. A short period after reactivity insertion, exponential terms with negative power die away. Therefore, a single rising exponential eventually dominates as Eq. (2):
@2
To perform the power rising experiment, a two input channel MCS was used. Fig. 1 shows the block diagram of the experimental set-up utilising ordinary nuclear electronic modules. As the BF3 neutron detector becomes saturated at low power levels, the FC detector was also used to determine the stable period of the reactor accurately. These detectors were inserted at the periphery of the core in graphite reﬂector region. The counting rates of the detectors are recorded by the MCS every second and is sent to the computer through USB port.
Fig. 2 shows the experimental data. The FC detector response is multiplied by 20 to show the results on a same scale of the vertical axis as BF3 neutron detector. Just before shutdown, at 564 s after positive step input reactivity, the counting rate of FC detector was around 10,000 CPS at peak power. As the FC detector was working at low counting rates during the transient (lower than 10,000 CPS) the loss rate due to dead time effect is negligible. Therefore, the stable period of the reactor was determined accurately using the data provided by this detector. Around 400 s after positive step input reactivity, BF3 neutron detector was saturated at about 180,000 CPS. Fig. 3 shows the response of FC detector in a semi-logarithmic scale. Stable period of the reactor was determined as 68.9870.18 s with the goodness of ﬁt equal to 0.9997. Using the calculated reactor period, the true counting rates of the BF3 neutron detector was anticipated. Fig. 4 shows the BF3 observed counting rates and its true counting rates anticipation. More than 50,000 CPS (after 250 s) dead time losses are clearly seen. At 380 s, the anticipated true counting rate is about 500,000 CPS, while the observed counting rate is around 180,000 CPS. In order to show a better illustration of the data, Fig. 5 shows changes of observed counting rates versus true counting rates of the detector. Extendable and non- extendable dead time models (Eqs. (3) and (4)) are ﬁtted to the information. Fitting parameters are shown on the ﬁgure. Extendable model shows overall agreement with the experimental information.
@3
@4
3.Distorted Poisson process and true counting rate estimation
3.1.Experimental set-up
Standard equipment for time interval measurement is available using ordinary nuclear instrumentation modules. Recently, TDCs have been developed using digital technologies [24,25]. In this paper, a TDC based on FPGA was used for time interval measurement [20]. The block diagram of the system is illustrated in Fig. 6. A 48-bit timer/counter discretizes the time based on the clock oscillator frequency (FOSC¼ 300 MHz). The time discretisation period is 3.33 ns
Fig. 1. Experimental set-up for power rising experiment in EHWZPR.
Fig. 2. Counting rates of BF3 and FC neuron detectors after positive step input reactivity (power rising experiment) of EHWZPR.
Fig. 3. Estimation of stable reactor period by the curve ﬁtting method. The data is provided by a FC detector.
Fig. 4. Observed counting rates and estimated true counting rates of the BF3 neutron detector after positive step input reactivity of EHWZPR.
Fig. 5. Observed counting rates versus true counting rates of the BF3 neutron detector. The two dead time models are ﬁtted to the data.
Fig. 6. General principle of the digital time interval analyser used to measure the time interval distribution of the BF3 neutron detector.
for this system. At the arrival time of every detection pulse, the time is recorded in the memory. Therefore, the difference between two successive input pulses returns the time interval. Details of the system description are published in the literature [20].
3.2.Data treatment
At low counting rates of the detector, the dead time distortion is highly limited to the short time intervals. Therefore, the exponential shape function of the distribution is mostly as Poisson PDF, weak interference of dead time effect on lengthy time intervals. A curve ﬁtting to the data in this region, might returns a very good estimation of the original process. The original exponential function is only shifted by the time τNE when non- extending dead time is inserted. An extending dead time alters the time interval distribution into a summation of exponentials with a dominant term with the same shaping function as the original one.
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
x 105
Dead time distortion
20 μs	100 μs
Time  intervals used for  curve fitting
The possible error due to dead time effect is negligible in this range
Fitted Curve = A × exp(- n t)
(A = 2.186E5±0.0025E5, n = 4.852E4±0.0035E4)
Goodness of Fit = 0.9999
Experimental Time Interval Distribution
(dead time distortion,
100 ns width of each time bin , 40 millions of pulses are analysed, 1000 time bins)
Pulse pile-up also can be modelled as extending dead time. At high counting rates, contribution of the dominant term is weaken. Therefore, the shape function is changed substantially. As a result, estimation error raises rapidly [26].
As dead time of the BF3 neutron detector is in the order of few microseconds, to realise the effect of dead time distortion, the detector was placed in a neutron radiation ﬁeld producing the counting rates of about 43,000 CPS. About 40 ~ 106 time intervals were analysed. The data acquisition time was about 921 s. The histogram of the results is shown in Fig. 7 in 1000 100 ns time bins. The Poisson distribution was ﬁtted to the time intervals greater than 20 ms. Fitting parameters are shown on the ﬁgure. The true counting rate is estimated as 48,520 CPS. Note that the shape of the curve determines the true counting rate, not the abundance data.
The inverse of the average time interval gives the average observed counting rate as Eq. (5):
@4
the average time interval is calculated using Eq. (6).
@5
Fig. 7. The time interval distribution, the red line is the Poisson PDF ﬁtted to the experimental data. At time intervals smaller than about 6 ms, the distribution is distorted due to the dead time effect. (For interpretation of references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Table 1
Parameters estimated by analysis of the experimental time interval distribution of the BF3 neutron detector.
where fi is a weighting function. The average observed counting rate is calculated equal to 43,422 CPS. Table 1 shows the inter- preted data from the time interval distribution of the BF3 neutron detector. The goodness of ﬁt of the curve is very close to unity (0.9999) demonstrating the accuracy of the approximation.
4.Dead time distortion and Monte Carlo simulation
In this section, numerical elaboration of the problem is consid- ered based on Monte Carlo simulation. In Monte Carlo simulation the original process is known, therefore, a very good  comparison between distorted and the  original  processes  is possible.  The  heart of Monte Carlo method is generated pseudorandom numbers with the appropriate PDF. Using inverse transformation method, the Poisson pseudorandom time intervals can be generated using a uniform distribution pseudorandom number as:
@7
j  is  the  index   for  the  independent   data  series.   In  this work,
10-million pseudorandom numbers with uniform distribution was generated using Rand() function in MATLAB software. These random numbers were recorded in memory to recall them in different simu-lations of the problem. Therefore, the same chain of  random numbers are used for all simulations performed in this work. As response of the BF3 neutron detector is mostly similar to extendable dead time behaviour, this model was chosen for the simulations. The experimental value for extendable dead time was selected as given in Table 3 (τE 2.288 ms).
Fig. 8 shows a symbolic illustration of extendable dead time effect on time interval distribution. Due to dead time effect, short time intervals are missed in the detector output, recorded time interval is the summation of all lost time intervals. Therefore, two important effects are occurred as follow:
Short time intervals are missed in the recorded time interval distribution.
A shift is occurred in the time interval distribution towards longer time intervals. As events in Poisson process are inde- pendent, the shift in the distribution has a constant probability for all recorded time intervals. Therefore, the shape of the recorded Poisson process is the same with the original dis- tribution for long time intervals.To check the validity of the Monte Carlo programme, the problem was solved in the conditions of the experiment. Fig. 9 shows the results. Except for very short time intervals (below 7 ms), the results show a very good agreement. The interpretation of the difference is that in experiment the complex and composite dead time effect and pulse pile up are affected. While, in Mote Carlo simulation, only extendable model is considered. Different combinations of non-extending dead time, extending dead time, and pulse pile-up are studied by the literature [9,10,18,19,26]. As the distortion is mainly limited to the short interval range, by proper choice of the counting rate as an experimental operation point of the detector, the impacts of these complications can be neglected.
Deviation of distorted processes from the generated ones are depicted in Fig. 10. Note that the horizontal axis is the time interval divided by the detector dead time. Two important information types are assigned to the results as follow:
Maximum time interval in which the distortion is effective is bounded within 5τE. It is important for curve ﬁtting process.
A shift in the distribution is seen at all counting rates which is the same for all time intervals greater than 5τE. Below 50,000
CPS (βo0.1144, the parameter β will be deﬁned shortly), shift
in the distribution is very small.
In order to determine the appropriate range for n, let deﬁne the inverse of dead time as below:
@8
Parameter β is a fraction deﬁned as:
@9
Fig. 9. Comparison of Monte Carlo results with experimental time interval distribution of the detector.
Value of β 1 corresponds to high counting rates  of  the  detector. Table 2 shows detailed information on Monte Carlo simulation results at different values of β. For all cases, the lower band of time interval ﬁtting range is 20 ms ( 45τE). As the total number of histories are the same for all cases, the following equation might be written:
@10Up to β¼ 0.8580 (n ¼ 375,000 CPS), no signiﬁcant error is seen. Above this range, the error is increased rapidly up to 7 percent    for β¼ 0.9152 (n ¼ 400,000 CPS). This is due to the partial distortion of the exponential shaping  function  of  the  process.  The processes with higher values of β cannot be used for the analysis as  their  shaping  functions  are  changed  thoroughly. Figs. 11 and 12 show the original and observed time interval distributions at two different values of β equal to 0.8008 and 1.14
respectively. For the ﬁrst one, Fig. 11,  although the counting rate   is relatively high and shift in the distribution is clearly seen, the
Fig. 10. Deviation of distorted Poisson process from the original one at four different true counting rates of the detector, simulated by the Mote Carlo method.
Table 2
Monte Carlo simulation results for extendable dead time distortion on Poisson process.
exponential shaping function is preserved as the original process at time intervals greater than 5τE. For the other case, Fig. 12, extending dead time bends the slope of the interval distribution, which is clearly visible in the ﬁgure. The non-conservation of the exponential shape of the interval distribution is already an indication that the counting statistics of the distribution is fundamentally different. Therefore, no information is gained by data analysis at this counting rate. Note that at high counting rates, lost events are increased quickly (refer to Table 2 and check the changes of L and M versus n).
5.Results  and discussion
Rearranging Eqs. (3) and (4) give expressions for dead time parameters of the models as follows:
@11
Fig. 11. Distortion of Poisson process at high counting rates (β E 0.8). The shaping function is still the same as the original one.
@12
Using values reported  in  Table 1, the dead time  parameters are calculated as 2.42070.018 ms and 2.28870.013 ms for non- extendable and extendable models respectively. Details about the results for estimated dead time parameters are illustrated in Table 3.
The  difference  between  the  results   is  due  to  the  method   of estimation. The power rising experiment examines the whole range  of  the  operational  counting  rates  of  the  detector  (see  Fig. 5), while, the method of time interval distribution analysis examines the detector at a single point of counting rate  ope-  ration.
In power rising experiment, true counting rates of the  detector is anticipated on the supposition that the loss rate in the curve ﬁtting range is relatively small, this is a source term for error propagation. However, using time interval distribution analysis, the data is estimated from the time interval range in which the  dead time effect is extremely small (see Fig. 7, the curve is ﬁtted to the range of time intervals from 20 ms to 100 ms). Therefore, parameters estimated by distribution analysis are more reliable than the other method.
Regarding the data reported in Table 3, reference to the power rising experiment, time interval distribution analysis underesti- mates the non-extendable dead time and overestimates the extendable dead time parameters. The differences are — 8.8 percent and 21.8 percent for non-extendable and extendable models respectively. Note that the plus or minus errors, reported
Fig. 12. Distortion of Poisson process at very high counting rates (β 41). The shaping function of the observed time interval distribution is changed over all time intervals.
in Table 3 are originated from numerical point of view (curve
ﬁtting uncertainties), not considering the systematic errors.The Monte Carlo method was employed to examine the appro-priate range of counting rates for the analysis. Dead time causes two types of variations in the Poisson process, missing the short time intervals and shift in the distribution. It was found that values of β lower than 0.85 are appropriate for the experiment. Above this  range, the observed shaping function deviates from the original one considerably causes a signiﬁcant error in the results. In the proper range of counting rates of the detector, the shaping function is preserved as the same with the original process in time intervals greater than 5τE.
Standard radiation sources are mostly decaying types with Poisson distribution of time intervals. The radiation source power must be enough high to make an adequate difference between observed counting rates and true counting rates of the detector, which corresponds to the detectable amount of distortion on the time interval distribution of the pulses.
The method of time interval distribution analysis is basically applicable for all kinds of radiation detectors. The experimenter should only place the detector in the radiation ﬁeld in which the detector is sensitive, no radiation exposure for the personnel due to handling of the radiation source. Two source and source decaying methods are difﬁcult experiments for neutron and gamma detectors. They are particularly suitable for alpha and beta detectors as the radioactive radiations do not have external radiation hazard. The power rising experiment is basically for neutron detectors.
Considering source decaying method, a single mode of decay- ing activated foil (e.g. Mn55) with a practical half-life is activated using a neutron radiation ﬁeld. To perform this experiment, a neutron irradiation facility such as a nuclear reactor is needed. It is the same for power rising experiment. Therefore, the cost of the experiment for a speciﬁc detector is high. Nevertheless, the  method of time interval distribution is a low cost  experiment  easily possible in a typical nuclear physics laboratory.
Assume a nuclear reactor working at a constant power, the detectors (those working in pulse mode operation) might be exam- ined by the method during the normal operation of the detection systems. Therefore, on line dead time estimation is possible. This is  an advanced capability of the method.
In general, the reproducibility of dead time  measurement  by the two source method is poor. Therefore, one may perform the experiment many times and ﬁnally report the average value. The results obtained by stochastic methods, VTM and time interval distribution experiments, are reproducible within the statistical uncertainties of the experiments.
Measurements in VTM experiment are performed for different values of gate-time [14]. Therefore, the data collection time in VTM experiment is considerably higher than time interval distribution method especially for detectors with lengthy dead time behaviour (like Geiger–Muller detectors) in which a wide range of gate-time might be examined.
The statistical uncertainty of VTM experiment ranges from 4 to 24 percent for typical neutron detectors [14]. While, this error is
Table 3
Estimated dead time parameters of the BF3 neutron detector for two types of dead time models using power rising and time interval distribution analysis experiments.
smaller than 1 percent for time interval distribution method (refer to Table 3 and check the statistical uncertainties).
The apparatus for time interval measurement is generally available in the form of time to amplitude converters2 as standard nuclear instrumentation modules (however in the present work a TDC is used). For VTM experiments, MCS units with appropriate gate-time features (typically from few microseconds to a hundred millisecond) are required which might be considered as an espe- cial measuring tool [14].
6. Conclusion
Dead time distorts the Poisson process and causes losses  of counts in the output of nuclear radiation detectors. Existing deter- ministic methods of dead time estimation introduced in the litera- ture are based on counting rates analysis of the detector response at different levels of radiation intensities. In this paper, an alternative stochastic method of dead time approximation is introduced  which is based on time interval distribution analysis. To check the validity of the method, a BF3 neutron detector was employed as a case study of the problem. Power rising experiment as a standard method of dead time estimation was performed. The results were explained in Section 2. The BF3 neutron detector was examined to measure the time interval distribution of the pulses during 921 s at the observed counting rate of about 43,000 CPS. This rate of count is proper to recognise the distortion of the Poisson process. Forty millions  of  time intervals were acquired during the time. Using Eqs. (5) and (6), the averaged observed counting rate of the detector was calculated. Considering the range of time intervals in which the distortion on  the distribution is extremely small, the true counting rate of the detector was determined using curve ﬁtting method (see Fig. 7).  Then these results were used to estimate the extendable and non- extendable dead time parameters. The results are reported in Table 3 for both power rising and time interval distribution analysis meth- ods. A relatively good agreement is seen between the results. Monte Carlo simulation was performed in Section 4. The proper range of experimental time intervals for dead time estimation was deter- mined as 45τE. Also, as the observed time interval distribution deviates at high counting rates, it is concluded that the appropriate range for parameter β is lower than 0.85. Above this range, the observed shaping function deviates from the original one consider- ably causes a signiﬁcant error in the results.
Followings are the bullet points of the proposed method of dead time estimation:
The method is accurate and efﬁcient. The true counting rate of the detector might be determined accurately from interval distribution of  the pulses in which the dead  time interference  is extremely small.
A single radiation source with adequate radioactivity is needed to cause adequate distortion and to reduce the amount of acquisition time. The radiation source should obey Poisson statistics, being stationery and independent.
The method is basically applicable for all kinds of radiation detectors.
The method does not need any especial nuclear facility.
No radiation exposure, unlike two source and source decaying methods in which the experimenter is directly involve in handling of the radiation source/sources.
The method of time interval distribution analysis evaluates the detector dead time at a single point of counting rate operation. Nonetheless, the source decaying and power rising methods evaluate the detector response in a wide range of  operation. The method of time interval distribution analysis is a fast method.
Advanced capability of the method is on line dead time estimation, which is not possible by the other experiments.
The results obtained by the method of time interval distribu- tion is reproducible.
The method of time interval distribution is more accurate and faster than VTM method.
