<title>Electron–ion recombination in nuclear recoils tracks in nonpolar liquids. Calculation of the effect of external electric ﬁeld on the escape probability</title>
<Affiliation>Institute of Applied Radiation Chemistry, Lodz University of Technology, Wroblewskiego 15, 93-590 Lodz, Poland</Affiliation>
<author>Piotr Mateja, Mariusz Wojcik </author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2015.11.023 </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2015.11.023 </URL>
H I G H L I G H T S
●Electron recombination in nuclear recoils tracks is studied by computer simulations.
●The electron escape probability depends on the direction of applied electric ﬁeld.
●Application of molecular liquids in directional dark matter detectors is  discussed.
a b s t r a c t
A computer simulation method is applied to study electron–ion recombination in tracks of low-energy nuclear recoils in nonpolar liquids in which the electron transport can be described as ideal diffusion. The electron escape probability is calculated as a function of applied electric ﬁeld, both for the ﬁeld parallel to the track and for the ﬁeld perpendicular to the track. The dependence of escape probability on the ﬁeld direction is the stronger, the longer the ionization track, with a signiﬁcant effect being found already for tracks of ~ 100 nm length. The results are discussed in the context of possible applications of nonpolar molecular liquids as target media in directional dark matter detectors.
Keywords:
Electron–ion recombination Ionization tracks
Nuclear recoils Electron transport Diffusion
Dark matter detectors
1.Introduction
In recent years, there has been signiﬁcant interest in ionization and recombination processes taking place in tracks of atoms that recoil from elastic collisions with some elementary particles. This interest is related to the ongoing search for weakly-interacting massive particles (WIMPs), which are expected to be one possible form of dark matter (Bertone et al., 2005; Gaitskell, 2004). As WIMPs do not interact electromagnetically, probably the only way to detect them is to look for traces of their elastic collisions with atoms of ordinary matter. These collisions are expected to be ex- tremely rare and produce recoiled nuclei (usually referred to as “nuclear recoils”) that have energy on the order of a few keV. Studies of low-energy nuclear recoils are also important for other ﬁelds of particle physics, such as detection of coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus scattering (Drukier and Stodolsky, 1984).
In the search for WIMPs collisions, the crucial issue is how to distinguish them from collisions of other elementary particles producing similar effects, especially from neutron collisions. The most promising search strategies are based on the fact that WIMPs should be coming to the Earth from a preferred direction in the Universe, as a result of the motion of the Solar System (with the speed of ~ 230 km/s) across our galaxy (Ahlen et al., 2010). Finding an effective method to sense direction of detected nuclear recoils is therefore very important.
In  a  number of  existing  directional  dark matter detection   ex-
periments, low-pressure gases (mainly, CS2 or CF4) are used as target materials (Ahlen et al., 2010).  Tracks of keV nuclear recoils  in these materials are typically of a few millimeters length, which makes directional detection possible. However, in view of an ex- tremely low WIMPs count rate (~10—1 counts/kg/year) (Chepel and Araujo, 2013), low density of the target medium limits future applications of gas-based detectors in the dark matter search. On the other hand, the length of low-energy nuclear recoils tracks in condensed media is    100 nm, so in this case the direction of a    track is very difﬁcult to determine by direct observation.
An idea that has been considered for some time by detector  physicists (see, for example, Cao et al., 2015) is to use information from electron–ion recombination in a condensed system as  a  means of determining the track orientation in space. This idea is based on the postulated dependence of electron–ion recombina- tion probability on the track angle with respect to the direction of an applied electric ﬁeld. Less recombination is expected when the electric ﬁeld is perpendicular to the track than when the ﬁeld is parallel to the track. An angular dependence of the recombination probability is predicted by the Jaffe theory of columnar re- combination (Jaffe, 1913), and has been conﬁrmed experimentally for long high-energy proton tracks (Acciarri et al., 2013). However, whether this angular dependence can be observed for short tracks of low-energy nuclear recoils remains to be investigated.
Several large liquid-based detectors dedicated to direct dark matter searches have been built so far that use liqueﬁed rare gases (mainly, argon or xenon) as target media (Chepel and Araujo,  2013). Unfortunately, in these media the angular dependence of recombination probability for nuclear recoils tracks could not be observed (Cao et al., 2015). This is explained by the fact  that in  both liquid argon (LAr) and liquid xenon (LXe) the electron ther- malization distance is on the order of several thousand nan- ometers (Chepel and Araujo, 2013; Wojcik and Tachiya, 2003), much more than the typical track length of a keV nuclear recoil.  The applied electric ﬁeld very weakly affects the electron dis- tribution before thermalization, so  the  recombination probability is in fact practically independent of the ﬁeld direction.
The reason for the long electron thermalization distances in LAr and LXe is the speciﬁc nature of these media where no vibrational modes are available to effectively dissipate the electron energy. For the same reason, the mechanism of electron transport in these liquids is much different from ideal diffusion (Wojcik and Tachiya,2002), and the electron mobilities are very high. In many other dielectric liquids of purely diffusive electron transport and lower electron mobilities (for example, liquid hydrocarbons), the ther- malization distances are much shorter (~ 10 nm). It is therefore possible that in such liquids the recombination probability for nuclear recoils tracks signiﬁcantly depends on the direction of applied ﬁeld. To our knowledge, no systematic study of this pos- sible effect for lower-mobility nonpolar liquids has been per- formed so far.
In this paper, we present a computer simulation study of electron–ion recombination in low-energy nuclear recoils tracks in nonpolar liquids in which the electron transport can be described as ideal diffusion that includes a random, Brownian component and drift in the electric ﬁeld. We calculate the electron escape probability for a range of track parameters as a function of external electric ﬁeld, and compare the corresponding results obtained for the ﬁelds perpendicular and parallel to the track. We also discuss the results in the context of possible applications of lower-mobility nonpolar liquids as target media in directional dark matter detectors.
2.Method of calculation
The structure of low-energy nuclear recoils tracks in condensed media has not yet been precisely determined. It is known that only part of the initial energy of recoiled atoms is lost to ionizations and electron excitations, while the rest is transferred to atomic nuclei, mostly generating heat. More detailed data on LET of nuclear re- coils are available for noble liquids (Chepel and Araujo, 2013). For example, the LET of 5 keV recoils in LAr is estimated as 1.9 ~ 103 MeV/(g cm—2), with only about 0.2 of this value being spent on ionizations and electron excitations. The “electronic” LET is then calculated as ~ 50 eV/nm, which gives the average distance between successive ionizations of about 0.5 nm (the effective en- ergy needed to produce one ionization in liquid argon is 23.6 eV) (Miyajima et al., 1974). The density of liquid hydrocarbons and other similar nonpolar liquids is usually ~0.6 to 0.7 g/cm3, about two times lower than that of LAr. This suggests that the distance between successive ionizations in the former is probably about two times larger than in the latter. As these estimations are very rough, we decided to carry out our simulations using two values of the distance between successive ionizations, rion = 0.5 and 1 nm. In our model of the track, the cations are initially placed on a straight line. This simpliﬁcation is partly justiﬁed by the results of our study of electron recombination in nuclear recoils tracks in LAr (Wojcik, 2015), where we achieved much better agreement with experiment using the linear track model than using a random track model.
The simulation procedure that we use to model electron–ion recombination in nuclear recoils tracks is similar to that used by Bartczak and others (Bartczak and Hummel, 1987; Siebbeles et al., 1997; Wojcik et al., 1992) to study recombination in high-energy electron tracks. We assume that a track is initially composed of Nion cation-electron pairs. Each electron is placed in a random direction from its parent cation, with the initial electron–cation distance being set to r0. The calculations are carried out for several values of r0 which cover a wide range of probable electron thermalization distances in lower-mobility nonpolar liquids. Both the electrons and cations perform a diffusive motion, with the displacements of each particle being calculated as
@1
The ﬁrst and second term of Eq. (1) describe, respectively, a random Brownian component and drift in the electric ﬁeld (i) acting on i-th particle, which includes the Coulomb ﬁelds from all other particles in the track and an external ﬁeld F. R(i) are random vectors whose components are independently sampled from the
standard normal distribution. D± and μ± denote, respectively, the diffusion coefﬁcients and the mobilities, where index “ þ” refers to cations and index “—” to electrons. The simulation time step Δt is variable and calculated as Δt = min(βr2 , Δtmax ), where rmin is the current minimum distance between any two particles in the sys- tem, and β and Δtmax are simulation parameters. These parameters are empirically tuned to avoid excessive computational load, while keeping the numerical errors negligible.
When an electron approaches a cation to a distance shorter than rcrit = 1 nm, a recombination reaction is assumed to occur and both particles are removed from the simulation. On the other hand, when an electron separates from the center of the initial track structure to a distance larger than rmax = 300 nm, it is as- sumed to escape recombination and also removed from the sys- tem. The simulation terminates when all electrons have either reacted or escaped. By repeating the calculations for a large number (~ 104) of independent track structures, we determine the recombination  probability   Prec   and   the   escape   probability Pesc = 1 − Prec.
In the calculations we assumed the dielectric constant typical  for nonpolar liquids, = 2, and temperature T = 298 K. The mo- bilities were assumed as μ− = 0.01 m2 V—1 s—1 and μ+ =
1.5 ~ 10—7 m2 V—1 s—1, with  the  corresponding  diffusion coefﬁ-
cients being obtained from the Einstein relation μ±/D± = e/kB T , where e is the elementary charge and kB is the Boltzmann  con- stant. It should be pointed out that the simulation results of Prec or Pesc do not depend on the assumed mobilities, as long as μ+ is much lower than  μ−.  As expected theoretically, and also conﬁrmed by our
calculations, μ− affects only the kinetics of the recombination process, and not the recombination probability itself. No sig- niﬁcant effect on Prec was also observed when μ+ was reduced from the value given above to zero. The simulation results are also not sensitive to the assumed reaction distance rcrit, which is explained by the very strong Coulomb attraction in the nonpolar system. On the other hand, Prec depends on the assumed escape distance rmax. The magnitude of  this effect can be assessed based on the theory   of geminate recombination. The escape probability for an isolated electron–ion pair is expressed as Pesc = exp(−rc/r0 + rc/rmax ), where
rc    is  the  Onsager  distance  deﬁned  by   rc  = e2/4πε0 εkB T .  For the
parameters  assumed  in  this  study,  the  single-pair  escape  prob-
ability  calculated  using   rmax = 300 nm  is  about  10%  higher  than
that  obtained  for   rmax → ∞.  Probably  a  similar  effect  can  be ex-
pected on Pesc obtained from our simulations. It should be noted, however, that the present study is mostly concentrated on de- termining the angular dependence of Pesc rather than the absolute values of this probability. One can expect that the ratio of escape probabilities obtained with the electric ﬁeld perpendicular and parallel to the track is much less affected by the assumed value of rmax than the escape probabilities themselves.
3.Results and discussion
Fig. 1 shows the simulation results of the escape probability obtained for tracks of Nion = 50 and 200 electron–ion pairs in an external ﬁeld being applied in the direction either perpendicular (perp.) or parallel (par.) to the track. The escape probability is seen to increase with increasing ﬁeld in all the cases shown. Pesc also increases when the distance between successive ionizations rion changes from 0.5 nm to 1 nm, while it becomes lower when Nion is changed from 50 to 200. The effect of ﬁeld direction on the escape probability depends on both rion and Nion. While in the case of
rion = 0.5 nm and Nion = 50, this effect is weak and appears only at very high ﬁelds (above ~ 50 kV/cm), it is signiﬁcantly stronger at other values of these parameters.
The effect of ﬁeld direction on Pesc is better seen in Fig. 2 which shows the relative increase of the escape probability
@2
resulting from the change of ﬁeld direction from parallel to perpendicular to the track. To calculate the curves plotted in this ﬁgure, we ﬁrst approximated the simulation results of Pesc = f (F ) using second-order polynomials. From Fig. 2 we see that ΔPesc,r increases with increasing number of electron–ion pairs, and also increases when rion is changed from 0.5 nm to 1 nm.
The results presented in Fig. 2 also show the effect of the initial
electron–cation  distance  on  ΔPesc,r . In  the considered  range of r0,this effect is relatively weak. While the results of ΔPesc,r obtained at  r0 = 10 nm are in most cases slightly higher than the  corre- sponding data for r0 = 20 nm, the results obtained at r0 = 6 nm do not follow this trend. It should be noted, however, that the values  of Pesc obtained at r0 = 6 nm are usually very low ( o0.01), so the statistical simulation errors are in this case not negligible.
In Fig. 3 we plot selected results of  ΔPesc,r = f (F ), taken  from  Fig. 2(A) and (B), which are now grouped according to the total length of the ionization track, approximately equal to L = Nion rion. From Fig. 3 we see that the track length is the main factor that controls ΔPesc,r . The ionization density, expressed here through rion, has a substantially weaker effect on ΔPesc,r than the track length itself.
From the practical point of view, it might also be important to know the minimum ﬁeld strength at which a signiﬁcant effect of ﬁeld direction on Pesc could be observed. In Fig. 4 we plot the ﬁeld
Fig. 1. Probability of electron escape from nuclear recoils tracks as a function of applied electric ﬁeld. The simulation  results obtained for the tracks formed of    Nion = 50 (blue symbols) and 200 (red symbols) electron–ion pairs, in the case of the ﬁeld parallel to the track (par., open symbols) or perpendicular to the track (perp., closed symbols). (A) rion = 0.5 nm, (B) rion = 1 nm. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
strength at which ΔPesc,r achieves 0.05, denoted by F0.05, as a function of track length L. The value of F0.05 at L = 25 nm is ex- cessively high for practical applications. However, at L ≥ 100 nm the ﬁeld strength F0.05 is below 10 kV/cm, which is attainable in liquid-ﬁlled ionization detectors.
The simulation results presented in this paper show that for nuclear recoils tracks in nonpolar liquids of a diffusive electron transport mechanism, it is theoretically possible to observe a de- pendence of the electron escape probability on the track direction with respect to applied electric ﬁeld. This dependence is the stronger, the longer the ionization track, with a signiﬁcant effect being found already for tracks of ~ 100 nm length. Following the LET estimations given in Section 2, such tracks can be formed by nuclear recoils of energy as low as ~10 keV. It has also been found here that the directional dependence of Pesc is not much affected by the initial electron–cation distance (within the realistic range of this parameter between 6 and 20 nm). This is an important Fig. 2. Relative increase of the escape probability resulting from the change of ﬁeld direction from parallel to perpendicular to the track, as a function of ﬁeld strength. The results obtained for Nion = 50 (blue curves), 100 (green curves), and 200 (red curves), and for various  values  of  the  initial  electron–cation  distance  r0.  (A) rion = 0.5 nm, (B) rion = 1 nm. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
information in view of the fact that the exact form of the electron thermalization distance distribution is usually unknown.
Various liquid hydrocarbons and other nonpolar molecular liquids in which the electron mobility is lower than in LAr or LXe were successfully used as target media in radiation detectors, usually exposed to alpha particles or high-energy photons (see, for example, Holroyd et al., 1991; Munoz et al., 1986). It is still not clear, however, if such liquids could also be used in directional dark matter detectors. While a sufﬁciently strong angular dependence of the escape probability has been found from our calculations, the low values of Pesc for nuclear recoils tracks  pose a ser- ious problem. As the escape probability calculated in this study is always well below 0.1 (cf. Fig. 1), very few electrons are expected to escape from nuclear recoils tracks when the electron transport mechanism is ideal diffusion. Moreover, the experimental  uncertainty of the relative  change of escape probability ΔPesc,r can be large at low Pesc because the standard errors of ΔPesc,r and Pesc are related by σ (ΔPesc,r ) ≈ 2σ (Pesc )/Pesc, as de- rived from Eq. (2). Further theoretical studies are needed to ﬁnd suitable condensed-phase target media for directional dark matter detectors.
Fig. 3. Relative increase of the escape probability resulting from the change of ﬁeld direction from parallel to perpendicular to the track, as a function of ﬁeld strength. The simulation results obtained for rion = 0.5 nm (solid curves) and 1 nm (dashed curves), grouped according to the track length L. The initial electron–cation dis- tance is r0 = 10 nm.
Fig. 4. Electric ﬁeld strength at which ΔPesc,r = 0.05 as a function of track length L. The results obtained for rion = 0.5 nm (squares) and 1 nm (circles). r0 = 10 nm.
These studies should go beyond the idealized physical picture of electron diffusion and take into account speciﬁc features of electron transport in various nonpolar liquids.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the National Science Centre of Poland (Grant no. DEC-2013/09/B/ST4/02956).
