<title>Analyzing local perceptions toward the new nuclear research reactor in Thailand</title>
<Affiliation>a.Department of Industrial Engineering, Kasetsart University, 50 Ngam Wong Wan Road, Lat Yao, Chatuchak, Bangkok, 10900, Thailand
b.Renewable Energy Research Team, National Metal and Materials Technology Center, 114 Thailand Science Park, Phahonyothin Road, Khlong Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand
c.Thailand Institute of Nuclear Technology (Public Organization) 9/9 Moo 7, Sai Mun, Ongkharak, Nakhon Nayok, 26120, Thailand</Affiliation>
<author>Sarasinee Tantitaechochart, Naraphorn Paoprasert , Kampanart Silva  </author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.05.013</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.05.013</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Understanding public perception on nuclear research reactor is necessary for the policy maker to adopt such technology in Thailand, especially the locals who live in the proposed location. The study compared perceptions between the locals living near the proposed nuclear research reactor location (within 5 km) and those living in the outer region (5e15 km). Structural equation modeling technique was adopted by assuming casual relationships between latent variables including social status, information perception, trust, beneﬁt perception and risk perception on the local acceptance of research reactor. The results showed that the strongest relationships for both the inner and the outer perimeters were from infor- mation perception toward technology acceptance via trust and beneﬁt perception. While both zones showed similar results, the outer perimeter seemed to show slightly stronger effects than those in the inner perimeter.
Keywords:
Nuclear research reactor Public perception
Risk perception
Structural equation modeling
1.Introduction
Thailand has never possessed any nuclear power reactor. Also, nuclear power has recently been excluded from the latest Power Development Plan [1]. However, there is currently a nuclear research reactor, called the Thai Research Reactor-1/Modiﬁcation 1 (TRR-1/M1). The main purpose of the reactor is to produce neutrons to facilitate nuclear research and development, and industrial, agricultural and medical applications. It has been operated since 1961, located inside the Thailand Institute of Nuclear Technology (TINT) in Bangkok.
Due to the increase in domestic and regional demand, TINT has planned to build a new nuclear research reactor at its headquarters in Ongkharak District, Nakhon Nayok Province. Although the con- sequences of an accident from a research reactor if happens are signiﬁcantly smaller than those caused by a nuclear power reactor; unfortunately, the risk is sometimes mistakenly assessed to be similar [2]. It is therefore essential for the government to carefully design the public involvement program in order to gain public awareness and acceptance of the project.
Several methods have been selected to explore public percep- tion toward nuclear power such as the multivariate regression [3e5], descriptive analysis or qualitative methodologies [3,6], linear and multinomial logistic regression analysis [7], and structural equation modeling (SEM) technique [8e18]. The SEM technique, a combination of multiple regression analysis and factor analysis, was employed in this study. It could estimate the multiple and interrelated dependency in a single analysis which enable the visualization of linkages between different aspects of public perception and the reasons behind. SEM allows tests of whether certain assumptions are valid. This included studies whether a latent (unobserved) variable could be explained with the assumed observed variables, and also whether the latent variables had ca- sual impacts quantitatively on another latent variables.
To our knowledge, there has not yet been any study that has analyzed public perceptions for a nuclear research reactor using the SEM technique. There have been a number of studies for nuclear power reactor which can serve as a good starting point. Visschers and Siegrist [9] showed that the beneﬁt perception and risk perception inﬂuenced the acceptance of nuclear power plants. Furthermore, the public acceptance could signiﬁcantly change due to a serious accident like the Fukushima Nuclear Accident even though it happened elsewhere. Song and Kim [12], Ryu et al. [17]
and Li et al. [19] also found negative effect of risk perception on public acceptance of nuclear energy. This tendency could also be found in renewable energy in which risk perception had a negative impact on public intention to use renewable energy [10]. Wang and Li [11] found that acceptance of nuclear power by Chinese univer- sity students was mainly inﬂuenced by perceived energy supply beneﬁts and perceived environmental beneﬁts. They also  found that trust strongly affected perceived energy supply beneﬁts, environmental beneﬁts, and risk perception.
Nonetheless, due to the substantial difference between research reactor technology and nuclear power reactor technology, there is no guarantee that ﬁndings from the studies in a nuclear power reactor can be applied directly to the research reactor project. Be- sides, aforementioned studies were conducted in Switzerland, China and South Korea, all of which own nuclear power plants. Their social context can be signiﬁcantly different from Thailand which has never experienced nuclear power generation. Moreover, having both beneﬁt and risk perceptions as intervening variables in our structure was one novelty in this current study. In particular, we were interested in how independent latent variables (social status and information perception) affected beneﬁt and risk perceptions, especially via trust toward the governmental organization. The authors conducted a preliminary study [20] to investigate the perception and acceptance of a nuclear research reactor of the local public residing within 5 km around the proposed research reactor site. The result showed that trust was the main factor that affected risk and beneﬁt perceptions and also technology acceptance. The study was conducted only in two out of twelve subdistricts. The two subdistricts have received the largest amount of information and opportunities including ﬁnancial support from TINT. Other subdistricts located further from the planned site of the new research reactor (having rather limited access to the information and opportunities) may have different perception. It was worth
extending the survey target area to conﬁrm whether there were  any differences in perception in order to establish a comprehensive public participation strategy for the new research reactor. Note, however, that this study did not focus on supporting the con- struction of nuclear research reactor. Rather, it was aiming toward the objective of exploring reasonable public communication stra- tegies if the reactor was to be built.
2.Methodology
This research began by carefully designing Likert-scale ques- tionnaire to ask individuals residing around the new reactor site regarding to their perceptions toward the new research reactor. Path structure was also constructed based on existing literatures and expert opinions. Structural equation modeling technique was applied to validate the assumptions of casual network relationships among latent variables. Detailed methodology is explained below.
2.1.Sample selection
In this current study, responses were collected from people residing both in the inner subdistricts (0e5 km from the planned site consisted of the Municipality of Ongkharak and Sai Mun dis- trict) and the outer subdistricts (5e15 km from the planned site covering four subdistricts including Sisa Krabue subdistrict, Bang Pla Kot subdistrict, Bang Luk Suea subdistrict and Khlong Yai subdistrict).
Individuals from each village in each subdistrict were randomly selected to answer the questionnaire. The sampling strategy was to have at least 7 participants per village. The outer perimeter had greater number of respondents than the inner perimeter since the area was wider. The Bureau of Registration Administration [21] reported in 2017 that the inner subdistricts and the outer
Table 1
Questionnaire (Likert scale of 1e5).
Fig. 1.  Hypothesis model.
subdistricts population were 9,999 and 24,524, respectively. Hence, using  the  Yamane  method  with  90%  conﬁdence  level  [22],  the .number of  samples ¼ 9999 and 100 number of samples 1þ9999ð0:1Þ  	24524	for the inner and the outer perimeters, respectively.
1þ24524ð0:1Þ2
2.2. Questionnaire design
The survey included demographics and residential location, and
questions regarding to perceptions on the new nuclear research reactor. Six latent variablesdSocial status, information perception,
trust, risk perception, beneﬁt perception, and technology accept-
ancedwere of interest. Table 1 shows the 5-point Likert scale
questionnaire used in Joshi et al. [23] explained that the con- struction of Likert scales was rooted into the aim to understand
about the perceptions/opinions of participants related with the assumed latent variable. In these questions, there were several
Table 2 The measurement model constructs reliability.
referrals to TINT since it was the agency that was mainly respon- sible for public communication with the public regarding to installation of the new nuclear research reactor.
Besides the Likert-scale questions, other questions such as social status and residential location [8,20] were included. These social status questions were represented in IDs S1eS7 and D1. S1eS7 and D1 were sex, age, education, occupation, household monthly
income, whether the public was working with TINT, whether the public had close friends or acquaintances working at TINT, and location, respectively.
2.3.Data collection
There were in total 416 survey respondents. The number of 116
Fig. 2. Scree plots of the inner (top) and the outer (bottom) perimeters.
locals were collected in the inner subdistricts. The number of 300 locals were collected in the outer subdistricts.
2.4.Path structure of variables
We determined the paths based on our previous study [20], nuclear power plant studies and hypotheses from TINT expert opinions. From literatures, it was found that social status seemed to directly affect risk perception [24,25], beneﬁt perception [25], and technology acceptance [26]. Information perception seemed to directly affect risk perception [2,27,28], beneﬁt perception [2,27], and technology acceptance [8,27,29,30]. Studies also showed that social status [31,32] and information perception [17,33] affected trust. Trust seemed to directly affect risk perception [2,9,12,15,17,19], beneﬁt perception [2,9,12,15,19], and technology acceptance [8,17,30], and also incurred an indirect impact on technology acceptance (via risk, beneﬁt perception) [2,9,12,15,19]. Moreover, risk perception seemed to directly affect technology acceptance [2,8,9,12,15,17,27,30] and beneﬁt perception seemed to directly affect technology acceptance [2,8,9,12,15,27,30]. Hence, trust, risk perception, and beneﬁt perception were treated as the intervening variables in our model.
The hypothesis model was created by reviewing the relation- ships between factors, gji and bjk, where gji was the relationship between exogenous i and endogenous j variable and bjk was the relationship within the endogenous j and k variables. Factor loading of an observed variable l was represented as ll. Standard deviations of the observed variable l, dl or εl, were either for exogenous or for endogenous variable, respectively. The structure was shown  in  Fig. 1.
From Fig. 1, variables S1, S2, S4, S6, S7, D1, I1, B1, B3, and A2 from the questionnaire were omitted. Variables S1, S4, S6, S7 and D1 were the general data of the respondents which seemed not to be reasonable to include in the analysis and were not an ordinal question. Variable S2 was omitted since the distribution of the age was not signiﬁcant. Variables I1 and A2 were asked to check for the responders’ consistency in the answers; hence, it was redundant. Variables B1 and B3 were false questions to conﬁrm the knowledge level of the responders, and were thus omitted.
From Fig. 1, hypotheses were formulated based on the SEM model. Those include the following:
S/A:  There  is  a  direct  effect  from  social  status  (S)  toward 1.technology acceptance (A).
2.I/A: There is a direct effect from information perception (I) toward technology acceptance (A).
3.S/R/A:  There  is  an  indirect  effect  from  social  status  (S) toward technology acceptance (A) via risk perception (R).
4.S/B/A:  There  is  an  indirect  effect  from  social  status  (S) toward technology acceptance (A) via beneﬁt perception (B).
5.I/R/A:   There   is   an   indirect   effect   from   information perception (I) toward technology acceptance (A) via risk perception (R).
6.I/B/A:   There   is   an   indirect   effect   from   information perception (I) toward technology acceptance (A) via beneﬁt perception (B).
7.S/T/R/A:  There  is  an  indirect effect of  social  status  (S) toward technology acceptance (A) through trust (T) and risk perception (R).
8.S/T/B/A:  There  is  an  indirect effect  of  social  status  (S) toward technology acceptance (A) through trust (T) and beneﬁt perception (B).
9.I/T/R/A:   There   is   an   indirect   effect   of   information perception (I) toward technology acceptance (A) through trust (T) and risk perception (R).
I/T/B/A:   There   is   an   indirect   effect   of   information perception (I) toward technology acceptance (A) through trust (T) and beneﬁt perception (B).
After the hypotheses were formulated, model identiﬁcation was conducted to test whether the model was sufﬁcient to further analyze the relationships among all variables. The model identiﬁ- cation was based on Schumacker and Lomax [34] provided that the number of equations must be greater than that of the estimated parameters or models should be over identiﬁed or exact identiﬁed. This model was over identiﬁed.
3.Results
3.1.Reliability and validity of the measurement variables
All key indicators suggested that the model was sufﬁcient for further analysis. The results of KMO for the inner and the outer perimeters showed that sample indices were sufﬁcient. The sizes of the observed coefﬁcients to the sizes of the partial correlation co- efﬁcients for the sum of analysis variables were 0.784 and 0.856 for the inner and the outer perimeters, respectively. Both values were greater than 0.5. This indicated that a factor analysis may be useful with our data. In addition, supposition test of sphericity by the Bartlett test (Нο: All correlation coefﬁcients are not quite far from zero) was rejected on a level of statistical signiﬁcance (p 0.05). Consequently, the coefﬁcients were not all zero, so that the second acceptance of factor analysis was satisﬁed.
All diagonal values in the anti-image correlation matrices of both the inner and the outer subdistricts were all greater than 0.5. Moreover, the communalities of both the inner and the outer zones were mostly greater than 0.4 except for the extraction value of I2 (0.398) in the inner zone. However, since I2 was included in the outer zone, we also included I2 to in the outer zone since the communality of I2 was still very close to 0.4. According to Osborne et al. [35], these cut-offs for the anti-image correlation matrices and the communalities were recommended.
Additionally, Cronbach alpha coefﬁcients of the public for the inner and the outer zones were shown in Table 2 below. All vari- ables had Cronbach alpha coefﬁcients of at least 0.6 which passed the construct reliability criteria [36]. Note that Cronbach alpha coefﬁcient could not be obtained for the social status since the
Table 3
Factor loadings of the CFA for the inner zone.
Table 4
Factor loadings of the CFA for the outer zone.
questions were not in Likert scale.
Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) was performed to measure how well each latent variable represents the observed variables. Scree plots were observed to determine the number of latent var- iables shown in Fig. 2. From these scree plots, it was reasonable to select any number of factors ranging between 6 and 9. We decided to have six latent variables for both zones since the explanations of
the latent factors made the most sense. The total variance explained were 57.55% and 55.06% for the inner and the outer zones, respectively.
The goodness of ﬁt analysis of the CFA showed that c2/df were
equal to 1.16 and 1.32 for the inner and the outer zones, respec- tively. For both zones, the CFI, NNFI, and IFI were greater than 0.95, the SRMR were less than 0.08, and the RMSEA were less than 0.05. These measurement indices fulﬁlled the cut-off values. Thus, this result indicated that the construct validity was satisﬁed.
The factor loadings of the observed variables toward their latent variables and their standard errors were shown in Tables 3 and 4. The asterisk symbols in these tables indicated the signiﬁcant levels of effects (* was for 99% conﬁdence level, ** was for 95% conﬁdence level, and *** was for 80% conﬁdence level). The results showed that almost all factors were signiﬁcant at 99% conﬁdence level. Only S3 and S5 were signiﬁcant at 95% and 80% conﬁdence levels, respectively. Since the latent variables S and its observed variables S3 and S5 were included in the outer zone (with signiﬁcant level of 99%), for comparison purpose, we also included these variables in the SEM for the inner zone.
3.2.Structural equation modeling (SEM)
All goodness of ﬁt criteria were met for both the inner and the outer zones. Speciﬁcally, for the inner  zone,  the  c2/df  ¼  1.12,  CFI ¼ 0.96, NNFI ¼ 0.96, IFI ¼ 0.96, SRMR ¼ 0.077, and
RMSEA   0.032. For the outer zone, the c2/df   1.54,  CFI    0.97, NNFI 0.96, IFI 0.97, SRMR 0.061, and RMSEA 0.042.
The coefﬁcients, t-values and the standard errors of the
Table 5
Effect decomposition the exogenous on endogenous variables for the inner zone.
Table 6
Effect decomposition the exogenous on endogenous variables for the outer zone
hypothesized structural model for the inner and the outer perim- eters were shown in Tables 5 and 6, respectively. The values in these two tables without the parentheses were the coefﬁcients of the exogenous on endogenous and among endogenous variables. The values inside the parentheses were the t-values and standard er- rors. Asterisk symbols show signiﬁcant levels (the same meaning as those in Tables 3 and 4 described earlier).
Tables 7 and 8 showed factor loadings of the observed variables
and their standard errors (underneath the factor loading values) after model modiﬁcation for the inner and the outer perimeters, respectively.
From these tables and Figs. 3e4 (which showed the coefﬁcients graphically), hypothesis 1 (S/A) did not show signiﬁcant effect for both inner and outer zones. Hypothesis 2 (I/A) was rejected for both areas. We also failed to accept hypotheses 3 (S/R/A) and 4 (S/B/A) for both areas. Hypothesis 5 (I/R/A) was accepted at 80% conﬁdence level in the outer zone; while hypothesis 6
Table 7
Factor loadings of the CFA for the inner zone. Group Observed variable
Table 8
Factor loadings of the CFA for the inner zone.
Fig. 3. Coefﬁcients in the structural model for the inner zone.
(I/B/A) was rejected for both areas.
When trust was the intermediate factor, effects were stronger than the previous hypotheses (i.e., higher conﬁdence levels). Hy- potheses  7   and  8   (S/T/R/A  and  S/T/B/A)  were  both accepted at conﬁdence level of 99% for the outer zone. For the inner zone, we reject these hypotheses since the impact from S to T for the inner zone was not signiﬁcant. Hypothesis 9 (I/T/R/A) was accepted at 99% conﬁdence level for the outer zone. For the inner zone, this hypothesis was accepted at 80% conﬁdence level only for the  chain (I/T/R).  Hypothesis  10  (I/T/B/A)  was  the  stron- gest effect. The hypothesis was accepted at 99% conﬁdence level for both areas. Overall, effects in the outer zone were slightly stronger than those in the inner zone.
In terms of factor loadings for the observed variables shown in Tables 7 and 8, almost all factors were signiﬁcant at conﬁdence level of 95%. For the inner zone, S5 was accepted at 80% conﬁdence level. The results for both areas showed that factors T1, R1, B2, and A1 were not signiﬁcant. On the other hand, Table 9 showed the factors with the highest loadings for each latent variable. Note that since the number of observed variables in social status was too
small, we omitted the explanation of factor loadings for this latent variable.
4.Discussion
The correlations between I/T/B/A found in this study was supported by Komiak and Ilyas [33] who stated that higher perceived information could increase trust. Increase in trust from perceived information on nuclear research reactor observed in this study was similar to the correlation found in online reputation system [33]. Even if the contexts between nuclear research reactor and online reputation system were different, it was still reasonable to presume that these relationships were valid in many applications.
For the outer perimeter, one result showed that information perception directly impacted risk perception in a positive manner. Thus, the TINT needed to be careful when providing information directly to the public since risk perception could increase. The re- sults were consistent with those found in a few literatures. Stout- enborough and Vedlitz [29] and Roh and Kim [37] mentioned that Fig. 4. Coefﬁcients in the structural model for  the outer zone.
Table 9
Factors with the highest loadings for each latent variable.
public memory of the Fukushima nuclear accident was still fresh resulting in risk perception that was more than normal. Secondly, Zhu et al. [38] mentioned that it was hard to decrease risk perception by increasing public knowledge since the public had low perceived knowledge and are unfamiliar about nuclear energy. Thus, they had limited positive and negative information led to low-risk perception. Thirdly, Sjo€berg and Drottz-Sjo€berg [39] stated that negative information could easily lead to incorrect ideas and misconceptions of nuclear energy, resulting in high risk perception.
Other  studies  [40e42]  also  had  consistent  results  with  our  I/R relationship.
The I/R relationship was signiﬁcant only in the outer zone. This may due to the fact that Thailand had not personalized the expe- rience of the nuclear accident. Studies in the area where the long- operational nuclear power plant had never encountered any acci- dents showed that people living near the power station had more positive attitude toward nuclear energy [40,41] and were less likely to identify risks associated with nuclear energy production [42]. In other cases where people can establish strong connection between themselves and the nuclear accident, a U-shaped relationship be- tween the acceptance of nuclear power and the residential prox- imity was observed [43]. People living in direct vicinity and those living far away from the nuclear power station had a larger ten- dency of accepting nuclear power production than those living in between. This may also be similar for the case of nuclear research reactor in Thailand.
For  the  I/T/R  relationships,  there  were  several  researchers who explored the relationship between trust and risk perception in nuclear energy. For example, Xiao et al. [15], Ryu et al. [17] and Li et al. [19] found that when increasing trust, risk perception was decreased.
In terms of factor loadings for the observed variables, the major results showed that R3 was the most explicit signiﬁcant factor. This showed that the public residing near the nuclear research reactor site still felt very terriﬁed if the reactor was constructed in their area. This phenomenon was consistent to the NIMBY character- ization (the public oppose to the building of land in their immediate area but bringing lots of negative externalities to their back yard) [44].
5.Conclusions
The strongest relationship from our hypothesized structure was the impact from information perception to technology acceptance via trust and beneﬁt perception. This result implied that in order to eventually achieve technology acceptance from the locals, TINT's strategy should focus on ﬁrst building trust from the locals. This could come from providing information to the public, especially focusing on the information of beneﬁts from the new nuclear research reactor.
We also found that information perception directly increased risk perception in the outer perimeter, but this relationship was not signiﬁcant for the inner perimeter. Since Thailand had never experienced any severe nuclear-related incident, the people living near the proposed research reactor had more positive attitude to- ward nuclear technology than those living farther away. Further- more, if TINT aimed to acquire acceptance on the research reactor technology, it might be useful to extend information distribution, especially those related to beneﬁts from the reactor, to the people in the outer perimeter.
Our ﬁndings shed some lights on the public communication strategy for the government (via the TINT). The main concern for constructing the communication strategy must be to provide complete information regarding the research reactor construction. The increase in employment opportunity and the total revenue of local and country could be provided. Information regarding to the research reactor operation to make people feel that the reactor was safe should also be available, mainly to build trust. Finally, providing information that the reactor was worthwhile to the country and to the locals could make the acceptance in nuclear research reactor.
The study could be improved for better results. In this study, even if samples were randomly selected, those answered the questionnaire may be the ones who were already familiar with the technology to some extent. Perhaps, other sampling methods could be used in the future studies. Also, behavioral theories related to risk and beneﬁt perceptions such as cognitive skills and perception of danger could also be included to explore risk assessment of the people.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This study was funded by the Thailand Institute of Nuclear Technology (TINT), Bangkok, Thailand. However, any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions or recommendations in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the sponsors. The results were also not inﬂuenced by TINT.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.05.013.
