<title>Thermosetting polymer for dynamic nuclear polarization: Solidiﬁcation of an epoxy resin mixture including TEMPO</title>
<Affiliation>a.Quantum Beam Science Centre, Sector of Nuclear Science Research, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Shirakata-Shirane, Tokai, Ibaraki 319-1195, Japan ;b.Quantum Beam Science Centre, Sector of Nuclear Science Research, Kansai Photon Science Institute, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Kizugawa, Kyoto 619-0215, Japan</Affiliation>
<author>Yohei Noda , Takayuki Kumad, Daisuke Yamaguchi, Shin-ichi Shamoto</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2014.11.114</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2014.11.114</URL>
a b s t r a c t
We investigated the dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) of typical thermosetting polymers (two- component  type  epoxy  resins;  Araldites  Standard  or  Araldites  Rapid)  doped  with  a  (2,2,6,6-tetra- methylpiperidine-1-yl)oxy (TEMPO) radical. The doping process was developed by carefully considering the decomposition of TEMPO during the solidiﬁcation of the epoxy resin. The TEMPO electron spin in each two-component paste decayed slowly, which was favorable for our study. Furthermore, despite the dissolved TEMPO, the mixture of the two-component paste successfully solidiﬁed. With the resulting TEMPO-doped epoxy-resin samples, DNP experiments at 1.2 K and 3.35 T indicated a magnitude of a proton-spin polarization up to 39%. This polarization is similar to that (35%) obtained for TEMPO-doped polystyrene (PS), which is often used as a standard sample for DNP. To combine this solidiﬁcation of TEMPO-including mixture with a resin-casting technique enables a creation of polymeric target  materials with a precise and complex structure.
Keywords:
Dynamic nuclear polarization Polarized target
Neutron optics Thermosetting polymer Epoxy resin
1.Introduction
Dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) is promising for a wide range of applications, including as a polarized target in nuclear and particle physics [1], highly sensitive nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy [2], metabolic imaging combined with magnetic reso- nance imaging [3], broadband neutron spin ﬁlter [4], and contrast variation in small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) [5].
In DNP, the large electron-spin polarization in a high magnetic ﬁeld and at low temperature is transferred to proton spins via microwave irradiation at a frequency near the Larmor frequency of electron spin [6]. To incorporate electron spins in a sample, beam- irradiation [7–9] and chemical-doping [10–18] techniques were developed for this purpose. In chemical doping, stable radical (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-yl)oxy (TEMPO; see Fig. 1a) is known to work effectively as a source of electron spin [10]. Thus far, many groups have used a frozen-solution system in which paramagnetic species are dissolved [10].
Polymeric target systems doped with stable radicals are much easier to handle than solution systems because polymers form self-standing solids even at room temperature. In addition, poly- mer samples can be fabricated in the form of thin ﬁlms, which can reduce internal heating by microwave irradiation for DNP. Further- more, very thin (~ μm) polarized polymeric targets are now essential for experiments involving a low-transmission beam [11–14]. Free radicals can be doped into a polymeric system by solvent-casting [10,14,17] or vapor-sorption [10–13,15–18]. For the solvent-cast method, polymer and TEMPO are dissolved together, and the solution is poured into a ﬂat-bottom dish. Evaporation of the solvent leaves a TEMPO-doped cast ﬁlm in the dish. For the vapor-sorption method, polymer and TEMPO are put together in a sealed container. The TEMPO vapor spontaneously permeates the rubbery phase of the polymer; therefore, the polymer should inherit a continuous rubbery phase.
As a new class of polymeric target materials, we have focused on a thermosetting polymer, which solidiﬁes by forming a cross- linked network via irreversible chemical reactions triggered by  high temperature and/or mixing of several components [19]. This solidiﬁcation process is called “curing”. A merit of thermosetting polymers is that a resin-casting technique can be used. For resin casting, the resin shrinkage after solidiﬁcation is very small  because no volatile solvent is involved. Therefore, we can fabricate precise complex structures such as self-standing curved plates, and lenses with concave or convex surface.
Because neutron scattering phenomena are highly sensitive to proton spin polarization (PH), proton spin polarization has a signiﬁcant potential in neutron optical devices. In this direction, Eichhorn et al. recently developed a broadband neutron spin ﬁlter
Fig. 1. Chemical structure for (a) TEMPO free radical, (b) polystyrene (PS), and the reagents included in the epoxy-resin pastes: (c) diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA),
(d) N,N-dimethyldipropylenetriamine (DMAPAPA), and (e) 2,2'-(ethylenedioxyl)diethanethiol. Reaction schemes for crosslink formation between (f) amine and epoxy and
(g) thiol and epoxy.
for practical use, which is composed of an organic crystal at photo- excited triplet DNP states [4]. As other possibilities, if we make a lensed polymeric target, it can work as a neutron lens with adjustable focal length. The adjustable focal length arises because the index of refraction n for neutrons is given by n ¼ 1 —(λ2/π)ΣbiNi, where λ is the neutron wavelength, and bi and Ni are the scattering length and number density of elements within the target material [20,21], respectively. The scattering length bH of protons against a fully polarized neutron depends strongly on PH: bH  (  0.374 1.456PH) 10—12 cm [22].
Furthermore, epoxy resins can bind well on metal or ceramic surface. This property is favorable for the use at very low temperature. In addition, the physical properties of epoxy resins can be tailored by introducing ﬁller particles (silica, clay, etc.) [19]. As a commercial cryogenic epoxy (SK-229, Nitto Denko), a ﬁller introduction can improve a heat-shock resistance, which is favor- able for the use under cryogenic conditions.
Researches of materials science have been increasingly attracted by a structure formed by ﬁllers in thermosetting resin composites [23,24]. The nanometer-scale structure of these mate- rials can be determined by SANS with contrast variation [5,15–18]. A composite system including epoxy resins is a promising candi- date for future spin-contrast-variation SANS studies.
With these motivations in mind, we developed a TEMPO- doping technique for epoxy resin and  investigated  the  DNP  of the resulting TEMPO-doped epoxy resin. As a control, we also
studied TEMPO-doped polystyrene (PS; see Fig. 1b). In DNP experiments, PS is often used as a matrix for incorporating free radicals [10,14].
2.Experiment
2.1.Sample preparation
2.1.1.TEMPO-doped epoxy resin
For a source of electron spin for DNP, we used the TEMPO radical from TCI without further puriﬁcation. As two-component epoxy adhesives, we used Araldites Standard (referred to as “AS”) and   Araldites   Rapid   (referred   to   as   “ARAR”)   by   Huntsman Advanced Materials, because of their wide availability. Each of them is composed of a resin and hardener pastes. After mixing the two pastes, it takes 12 h for AS and 1 h for AR to solidify at ambient temperature.
According to the material safety data sheets (MSDSs) by Hunts- man Advanced Materials [25], the resin pastes of AS and AR contain 60–100% diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA), which contains epoxy groups at both ends, as shown in Fig. 1c. Since DGEBA we used has a molecular weight (MW) of less than 700, the number “n” in Fig. 1c is 0 or 1. The AS hardener paste contains 7–13% N,N-dimethyldipropylenetriamine (DMAPAPA; see Fig. 1d) and other polyamine compounds (not shown). The AR hardener
Table 1
Elemental composition of AS and AR. The absolute error in the weight ratio is 0.06%.
Fig. 2. Time evolution of TEMPO concentration in resin (●, ○) and hardener (■, □) pastes. The closed and open symbols indicate the data for AS and AR, respectively.
paste contains 1–3% DMAPAPA, 1–3% 2,20-(ethylenedioxyl)dietha- nethiol (Fig. 1e), and several tertiary amine compounds (not shown). The combination of polythiol and a tertiary amine is frequently used for fast-cure adhesives, because the tertiary amine catalyzes the reaction of polythiol with epoxy [19].
To plan beam experiments, the elemental composition of the cured resin is critical information. Therefore, the elemental analy- sis of the cured resin of AS and AR was consigned to Systems Engineering Inc., using the elemental analyzer CE-440 by Exeter Analytical Ltd. The results for C, H, N, O, and S elements are listed in Table 1. The absolute error for the weight ratio is 0.06%. Table 1 indicates that, as expected from the MSDSs, only AR contains sulfur, which is due to the polythiol compound.
Curing process is exothermic. The exotherm might be serious especially for fast-cure cases. We monitored the  temperature during the curing process, by embedding a type-K thermocouple within the resin mixture with 1 mm thickness  and  20 cm2  area. The temperature of AS mixture increased by only several degree celcius. Whereas, the temperature of AR  mixture increased up to  60 1C in 5 min after the mixing, then decreased down to 30 1C in   10 min. However, this temperature increase did not severely decompose TEMPO, as discussed later in Section 3.1.
TEMPO doped epoxy resins were prepared by the following procedure. We ﬁrst mixed resin paste (1 g) with TEMPO (10–12 mg) on a Teﬂon plate. Next, we mixed the resin-TEMPO mixture with hardener paste (0.8 g for AS or 1 g for AR). This mixing sequence was determined based on the slower decay of TEMPO in the resin paste (as discussed later). We placed the mixture between two Teﬂon sheets so that it formed a sheet about 1 mm thickness with an area of 20 cm2. After 12 h, we obtained the solid polymer sheet shown in Fig. 3 (left). For DNP experi- ments, we placed the pieces of resulting sheet sample within a 5-mm-diameter, 23-mm-long ﬂuorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) heat-shrink tube (1209-05, ARAM) as shown in Fig. 3 (right). Both ends of the tube were capped with short (3 mm) Teﬂon rods with 1.5 mm holes in the center. We sealed the sample unit inside
Fig. 3. Photograph of TEMPO-doped epoxy-resin samples (a) AS and (b) AR.
a gas-barrier ﬁlm package with oxygen absorbers, and stored it at
— 80 1C until the DNP experiment. The sample preparation was conducted under oxygen (O2) free condition, because incorporated O2 is known to relax proton spins faster to lower the magnitude of PH [26].
2.1.2.TEMPO-doped PS cast ﬁlm
As a control, we also studied PS (Fig. 1b) doped with TEMPO. We used PS pellets from Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (product number: 441147). The number-average MW of PS is ca. 170,000 and the weight-average MW is ca. 350,000. We used toluene ( 499.5% pure) from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd. as a solvent for casting PS ﬁlms.
TEMPO-doped PS samples were prepared by a casting from solvent. First, PS and TEMPO were dissolved in toluene, and the toluene solution was poured into a ﬂat-bottom dish. We kept the dish containing the solution within a gas-purge-type  desiccator (AS ONE Corp.) with continuously ﬂowing N2 gas ( 499.99% pure, ca. 0.5 L/min) for avoiding the sample's contact with O2. After one week, the solvent evaporated, leaving a 0.5-mm-thick ﬁlm of TEMPO-doped PS in the dish. The obtained cast-ﬁlm was placed inside a gas-barrier package with oxygen absorbers, and was then stored at — 80 1C until the DNP experiment.
2.2.Electron spin resonance (ESR)
We used a commercial X-band (9.4 GHz) ESR spectrometer (TE200, JEOL). By ESR measurements, we determined the TEMPO concentration of a sample. The area of the ESR absorption peak  was obtained after integrating twice the ﬁrst-derivative curve obtained by ESR measurements under the ﬁeld-modulation scheme. The sample volume was estimated from the weight by a balance (XS64, Mettler Toledo) and the density of the sample. The
5-mm-inner-diameter quartz tube containing small pieces of the sample (ca. 10 mm3) was inserted into the microwave cavity to the same depth for all measurements. As a calibration standard, we used  TEMPO-doped  PS  with  volume  of  ca.  10 mm3  sealed in  a	 	(%)
quartz tube. The absolute concentration of this calibration stan- dard was estimated from a toluene solution of TEMPO of known concentration, which was prepared just before the measurement.
2.3.DNP experiment
DNP experiments were conducted with a home-built DNP instrument comprising a superconducting magnet (3.35 T), 4He- evaporation cryostat (1.2 K), microwave unit (94 GHz; SOA-10- 94CS by VCSS), and NMR circuit (144 MHz) [27]. In the microwave unit, 94 GHz microwaves generated by a Gunn oscillator were ampliﬁed up to 200 mW. The output waveguide (WR10) is trans- duced into a 6-mm-inner-diameter tube. A stainless steel tube ﬁlled with Teﬂon (a length of 1 m and an inner diameter of 6 mm) transmitted the microwaves into a cylindrical aluminum chamber (an inner diameter of 34 mm and a height of 50 mm) containing a sample. The proton-spin polarization was measured by a contin- uous wave (CW)-NMR circuit. A phase-sensitive detector, located outside of the cryostat, was connected through a 1.5 m, 50 Ω coaxial cable to the NMR probe, consisted of a capacitor (C ¼ 10 pF) and a sample-holding ﬁve-turn coil (L 0.13 μH) in a series con- ﬁguration. By phase-sensitive detection, we measured radio wave reﬂection from the NMR probe as a function of frequency.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Loss of TEMPO during curing
We determined the decay rate of the electron spin for TEMPO in AS and AR resin and hardener pastes. These pastes include chemically active groups such as epoxy, amine, and thiol. Fig. 2 shows the decaying behavior of the TEMPO radical for TEMPO dissolved in the two pastes. The time proﬁles are well ﬁtted by a single exponential with time constant τ [A exp(— t/τ), where A is a constant prefactor, t is the time, and τ is the decay time constant]. The ﬁt gives the time constant listed in Table 2. As a result, TEMPO decayed ﬁve times faster in the hardener pastes than in the resin pastes. Therefore, we suspect that the amine groups in the hardener pastes are a critical factor in TEMPO loss.
Table 3 shows the TEMPO concentration expected based on the amount of TEMPO added during sample preparation and the resulting TEMPO concentration by ESR. We tried two different initial TEMPO concentrations (35 and 40 mM). For each concen- tration, we performed the experiment twice to verify reproduci- bility. During sample preparation, a larger amount of TEMPO was lost for AS than for AR. Because the AS cure took 12 h, TEMPO had more time to decay for the AS cure than for the AR cure, resulting in a larger loss of TEMPO in comparison with AR, which lost a relatively small amount of TEMPO.
Table 2
Exponential decay time constants τ for TEMPO at room temperature in the resin and hardener pastes.
Table 3
Efﬁciency of incorporating TEMPO.
3.2.Inﬂuence of TEMPO on resin solidiﬁcation
One of the most important ﬁndings of this article is that the epoxy resin solidiﬁed, even when containing dissolved TEMPO, to give a solid sheet (see Fig. 3). On the other hand, the ESR measurements reveal that TEMPO decays in the resin and hard- ener pastes, as mentioned in the previous section. This result indicates that a portion of the TEMPO reacts with active groups in the resin and hardener pastes, possibly rendering these groups inactive. Despite this undesirable reaction, the curing process is not severely disrupted.
According to the literature [19], the epoxy resins solidify by cross-linking to form a network. Two types of cross-linking reactions are possible: copolymerization and homopolymeriza- tion. Copolymerization is the dominant process, and occurs between epoxy and amine (Fig. 1f) or between epoxy and  thiol (Fig. 1g). Homopolymerization, however, is due to the reaction between two epoxy groups and is typically a slow reaction. At the cross-link formation reaction for the dominant process of copoly- merization, a single epoxy group consumes a single active hydro- gen of the polyamine or polythiol compounds. Here, “active hydrogen” means hydrogen atoms directly  bound  to the  amine's N atom in the polyamine compounds. Similarly, for the thiol compound, a single SH group contains a single active hydrogen.
We estimated the initial concentration of the epoxy group (Cepoxy) and active hydrogen (CactiveH) in the mixture of the two pastes for AS. By use of the typical values listed in Table 4, we obtained Cepoxy¼ 1.5 mol/L (M) and CactiveH¼ 0.9 M. Because the subsidiary homopolymerization might occur in practice, it is favored that the amount of epoxy groups is more than that  of active hydrogen atoms [19]. The concentration of TEMPO radical lost by curing was around 10 mM, as shown in Table 3. This is two orders of magnitude less than Cepoxy (1.5 M) and CactiveH (0.9 M). Therefore, if we assume a 1:1 reaction between TEMPO and the active groups in the pastes, the majority of the active groups are  not affected by the dissolved TEMPO. This reasoning explains the successful solidiﬁcation.
3.3.ESR spectrum
Fig. 4 shows the ESR spectrum of TEMPO-doped AS, AR and PS with TEMPO concentrations of 28.8, 30.2, and 30 mM, respectively. Their TEMPO concentrations are close to the known optimum one (30 mM) for DNP. For all of the samples, the ESR spectrum at room temperature had three split lines, caused by the hyperﬁne inter- action between electron spin and 14N nuclear spin (I 1) of the nitroxide moiety. The well-separated peaks in the ESR spectrum clearly indicate that TEMPO dispersed well and did not aggregate.
Table 4
Calculated initial concentration of epoxy group (Cepoxy) and active hydrogen (CactiveH) in the mixture of the two pastes of AS. The parameters used for this calculation are also listed. We used the following equations: Cepoxy ¼(nDGEBA fDGEBA dresin)/(MDGEBA kmix) and CactiveH¼(nactiveH,DMAPAPA fDMAPAPA dhardener)/(MDMAPAPA kmix). In calculating CactiveH, we only considered DMAPAPA and neglected a minor contribution of other polyamine compounds.The broadness of the two side peaks compared with the central
Fig. 4.  ESR spectrum of TEMPO-doped AS, AR, and PS at (a) room temperature and (b) 77 K. In panel (a), the gray circle for AR indicates the sharp, minor component    as discussed in Section 3.3. In panel (b), the thick gray curves are the ﬁts to the experimental data.
peak indicates that the rotation of the TEMPO molecule was partially restricted by its surroundings. The observation of the broader side peaks for AR with respect to AS indicates that the TEMPO radical in AR is less mobile than that in AS. In addition to the broader side peaks, the ESR spectrum of AR shows a small, sharp signal at 336.5 mT, as indicated by the gray circle in Fig. 4a. At ﬁrst, we suspected a generation of paramagnetic byproducts due to cross-linking reactions. However, as shown in Fig. 4b, the ESR spectrum of AR at 77 K is quite similar to that of AS. Therefore, AR must include only TEMPO, but there are two domains with different local mobilities. Based on the area of this small sharp signal, which is the left peak of the three-way-split line of TEMPO, the amount of this minor contribution was quite small (2–3% of the total).
For all of the samples, the ESR spectra at 77 K (black curves in Fig. 4b) are well resolved, which indicates clearly that TEMPO dispersed well even at the frozen state. The experimental line- shape is reproduced well by simulated ones (thick gray curves in Fig. 4b). They are calculated based on the equations in the literature
[28] with the following parameters. For both of AS and AR, the principal values of hyperﬁne coupling (Ax, Ay, Az)¼(0.6570.20 mT,
0.6570.20 mT, 3.5070.10 mT), and the principal values of g factor (gx, gy, gz)¼(2.01070.001, 2.00670.001, 2.00270.001). For PS, (Ax, Ay, Az)¼ (0.7070.15 mT, 0.7070.15 mT, 3.4070.05 mT) and (gx, gy, gz)¼(2.01070.001,  2.00670.001,  2.00270.001).  These   values   are
Fig. 5. Proton NMR signal enhancement by DNP for AS.
close to the formerly reported values for nitroxide compounds [28]. As an intrinsic absorption peak for the line-shape simulation, we used pseudo-Voigt function Vp(x), which is a linear combination of
Fig. 6. DNP spectra of TEMPO-doped epoxy-resin samples for (a) AS and (b) AR.
Table 5
DNP performance of TEMPO-doped epoxy-resin and PS samples.
Lorentzian and Gaussian functions.
@1
Here, η determines the ratio of Lorentzian and Gaussian functions, and σ is the half line width. For all the calculations, we commonly used η¼ 0.3 and σ¼ 0.6 mT. This indicates that the TEMPO molecules experience similar electron–electron interactions for all the samples.
3.4.DNP
Fig. 5 shows the observed proton NMR signal. The signal can be well reproduced by a Gaussian function, A exp[—(ν— νH)2/σ2], with νH ¼ 143.144 MHz and σ¼ 0.036 MHz. Here, A is a constant, ν is a radio frequency, νH is a central radio frequency, and σ is a half-line- width. We calculated the proton-spin polarization (PH) based on  the enhancement of the area of the NMR signal from its value under the thermal equilibrium (TE) state at 4.2 K. PH for the TE state can be calculated using the Boltzmann distribution; PH ¼ tanh (hνH/kT), where h is Planck's constant, k is Boltzmann's constant, and T is the temperature.
Fig. 6 shows the DNP spectra (i.e., the achieved maximum |PH| as a function of microwave frequency) for AS and AR. Based on previous reports [29,30] and this study, thermal mixing mechan- ism can be safely assumed as the dominant mechanism for DNP. At
1.2 K, PH ranges from — 39% to þ35% for AS and from — 35% to 33% for AR. The achieved maximum |PH| of AS and AR is close to that of PS (35.6%) as listed in Table 5. As expected from the 77 K ESR spectra, showing that TEMPO disperses similarly for all the
samples, the achieved maximum |PH|s were close to each other.
4.Conclusion
We study a typical thermosetting polymer that belongs to the new class of polymeric target materials for DNP. These polymers
are based on two-component epoxies that we doped with TEMPO radical. We measured the decay of TEMPO radical concentration during the cure process. The DNP performance of the TEMPO- doped epoxy-resin samples is close to that of the TEMPO-doped polystyrene sample. Compared with the conventional doping technique, thermosetting resins have the following advantages: Complicated forms can be fabricated by resin casting, and compo- site technologies can extend their functions. Further studies utilizing these attractive natures are expected.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Dr. B. van den Brandt and Dr. P. Hautle at the Paul Scherrer Institute, and Emeritus Professor N. Horikawa at Nagoya University for their fruitful comments and suggestions on developing our DNP system and for discussions.
