<title>Data-Driven Analysis of Ultrasonic Inspection Data of Pressure Tubes</title>
<author>Panagiotis Zacharis,* Graeme West, Gordon Dobie, Timothy Lardner, and Anthony Gachagan</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>University of Strathclyde, Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Royal College Building, Glasgow G1 1XW, United Kingdom</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2017.1421803</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2017.1421803</URL>
Abstract — Pressure tubes are critical components of CANDU reactors and other pressurized heavy water–type reactors because they contain the nuclear fuel and the coolant. Manufacturing flaws as well as defects developed during in-service operation can lead to coolant leakage and can potentially damage the reactor. The current inspection process of these flaws is based on manually analyzing ultrasonic data received from multiple probes during planned, statutory outages. Recent advances in ultrasonic inspection tools enable the provision of high- resolution data of significantly large volumes. This highlights the need for an efficient autonomous signal analysis process. Typically, automation of ultrasonic inspection data analysis is approached by knowledge-based or supervised data-driven methods. This work proposes an unsupervised data-driven framework that requires no explicit rules or individually labeled signals. The framework follows a two-stage clustering procedure that utilizes the Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise density-based clustering algorithm and aims to provide decision support for the assessment of potential defects in a robust and consistent way. Nevertheless, verified defect dimensions are essential in order to assess the results and train the framework for unseen defects. Initial results of the implementation are presented and discussed, with the method showing promise as a means of assessing ultrasonic inspection data.
Keywords — Pressure tube, ultrasonic inspection, machine learning.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Ultrasonic nondestructive testing is widely used within the nuclear industry for flaw detection and characterization in materials.1,2 However, the analysis of data obtained from ultrasonic inspection is time consuming and often requires manual assessment due to the complexity of distinguishing between noise and signals indicating defective areas. Hardware advancements in ultrasonic nondestructive technologies offer the ability to stream data in far greater volumes than in the past. This is driving a demand for automatic inspection data analysis frameworks that will allow faster assessment while maintaining a consistent level of results. Consequently, several automation techniques that use either knowledge-based or supervised data-driven approaches have been explored in different industries.3–5 These approaches usually involve rules, assumptions, and signal transformations that are specific to the underlying monitored system, creating system-specific procedures, or require prelabeled individual signals.
Currently, there is limited research focusing on unsupervised analysis of ultrasonic inspection data. Outlier analysis has been applied as a means to diagnose structural damage in a variety of systems.6,7 This approach is based on the assumption of an existing baseline distribution of “healthy” signals and uses a predefined threshold of 3σ to determine the state of the examined signals. More recent work8 utilized a clustering algorithm and illustrated the feasibility of the method on a polymer specimen containing artificial defects. However, two crucial issues make this method unsuitable for our purpose. First, it is the requirement
of a predefined number of clusters (see Sec. III.C.1). Second,the assumption of point-to-point consistency between the signals, a requirement for the applied preprocessing step, cannot be guaranteed by the current pressure tube inspection process.
In this work, we propose an unsupervised machine learning approach to group together signals derived from defective regions and separate them from those  derived  from healthy regions of a component under inspection. The process does not require individually labeled signals or a predefined normal state. It follows a two-stage clustering procedure that takes into account both signal features and position features, enabling noise elimination. The extracted signal features are simple statistical properties of the signals that require no wave transformations. Furthermore, the num- ber of features is minimal to avoid the curse of dimensionality and time-consuming feature-space transformations that increase the number of assumptions. Enabling this procedure is a density-based clustering algorithm [Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN)] that offers advantages for this application, such as detection of arbitrarily shaped clusters, no requirement to predefine the number of clusters, and outlier detection.
This paper describes the application of the machine
learning approach to inspection data of CANDU reactor pressure tubes. The data sets consist of ultrasonic signals obtained by a 20-MHz normal incidence pulse echo probe and two pairs of axial pitch-catch probes (APCs) and circumferential pitch-catch probes (CPCs) from areas containing defects. Their location and sizing have been verified manually by independent analysts, providing a valuable source for the algorithm’s assessment stage. Initial results of the implementation are presented and discussed, with the method showing promise as a means of identifying pressure tube defects.
II.CANDU REACTORS
II.A.CANDU Design
CANDU is a type of pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) that uses natural uranium as fuel and heavy water [deuterium oxide (D2O)] as both coolant and moderator. The core structural components consist of low neutron absorbing materials (zirconium alloys), and its design enables high neutron economy, which is critical for achieving fission through a sustained chain  reaction given that natural uranium has a low fissile content. The core consists of a low-pressure steel tank called the calandria, which contains the moderator and around 480 fuel channels that run across the length of the calandria tank.
Fig. 1. CANDU reactor fuel channel.9
Each fuel channel (Fig. 1) consists of a thin Zircaloy tube (calandria tube) that contains another, thicker, Zircaloy tube called the pressure tube. The two tubes are separated by annulus garter-spring spacers that create a gap allowing the flow of an insulating gas called annulus gas. The fuel bundles are located inside the pressure tubes, and they are cooled by the hot ( 300°C) pressurized ( 10-MPa) heavy  water  coolant that runs through the pressure tubes. This configura- tion enables the insulation of the cool ( 70°C) unpressurized moderator from the hot pressurized coolant.
II.B.Pressure Tubes
Pressure tubes are one of the critical components of PHWRs currently operating in Argentina, Canada, India, Pakistan, South Korea, and Romania. During their 30-year design life, they are required to operate reliably in an extremely harsh environment of high pressure, tempera- ture, and neutron flux. Although extensive quality controls and monitoring of the pressure tubes have ensured good overall performance,10 pressure tubes are subjected to some degradation mechanisms facilitated by severe condi- tions, which could cause a pressure tube failure.
One of the principal degradation mechanisms that pressure tubes experience is concentration of hydrogen/ deuterium at large tensile stresses within the tube. This can precipitate hydrides that initiate a process called delayed hydride cracking (DHC) that can cause coolant leakage potentially damaging the reactor. Therefore, there is a need to closely monitor any pressure tube tensile stress concentrations, such as flaws and defects created during tube manufacture, installation, commissioning, or operation. Examples of such flaws include refueling scratches, fuel fretting, crevice corrosion, and  debris  fretting.
II.C.Inspection Setup
The inspection of CANDU pressure tubes is currently mainly performed during planned, statutory outages. This paper focuses on data obtained by a multiple ultrasonic probe tool known as CIGAR (channel inspection gauging apparatus for reactors). The tool consists of two normal incidence probes (NB), operating at frequencies of 10 and 20 MHz, and two pairs of APCs and CPCs, respectively.11 Figure 2 illustrates a simplified configuration of a 20-MHz NB probe and the two pitch-catch pairs that effectively provide a multiview of a defect.
The process of analyzing these data sets of inspection data to provide defect assessment is currently being carried out manually by expert analysts. This constitutes a time-
Fig. 2. Orientation of the inspection probes.
consuming and costly operation as the reactor cannot be restarted until the end of the assessment process.
Currently, a new, more advanced tool known as BRANDE (BRIMS advanced non-destructive examination) is being deployed that is able to provide  high-resolution data of significantly larger volume. This highlights  the  need  for  an  autonomous   signal   analysis   process. Section III describes the proposed data-driven framework that aims to provide decision support for the assessment of potential defects within the CANDU pressure tubes in a robust and consistent way.
III.PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
III.A.Ultrasonic Inspection Data
This research focuses on data sets containing the inspection ultrasonic waveform data obtained by the 20-MHz NB, the APCs, and the CPCs of the CIGAR tool from sections of the inside surface of several pressure tubes. The tool scans the area of interest in axial and rotary increments effectively providing a set of three waveforms for each of the individual positions. The recorded waveforms consist of sampled amplitudes and are presented in the form of A-Scans (Fig. 3).
Each data set is obtained from separate areas of interest that are known to contain defects of debris fretting type. However, the available A-Scans are unlabeled; i.e., the individual signals are not accompanied by information on whether their location is within or outside the often irregularly shaped defective area. Instead, the information that will be used for assessing the performance of the following analysis is the verified dimensions and starting position of the defects.
III.B.Feature Selectionamplitude-time pairs) into small subsets of representative features that act as the input to the learning process. Driven by the requirement to provide a general system that is able to adapt to diverse surface pressure tube conditions and irregularly shaped defects, the features are selected based on a set of characteristics that aims to facilitate the forma- tion of a non-system-specific procedure.
The basis of the proposed selection is that the features should be descriptive characteristics of the individual signals that do not require explicit threshold-based assumptions about the signal. Therefore, descriptive statistical measures that quantitatively summarize the entire signal were chosen instead of gating methods or methods based on detection of explicitly defined signal characteristics. Furthermore, the signals are not filtered through signal transformation procedures, such as Fourier transform (FT) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT). Besides increasing the computa- tional effort, FT does not provide time-related information. Although DWT provides temporal resolution, it would increase the complexity of the system as it is sensitive to  the choice of wavelet type as well as the length of the wavelet filter.12
The extracted signal features are the variance, the maximum value, the minimum value, and the index positions of the first instances of maxima and minima within the signal. These features, although simple, show promising capabilities of carrying information on the condition of the pressure tube surface and potential defects. A way of illustrating this information is a two-dimensional top-view presentation (C-Scan) of the data set where each pixel represents the physical position of a signal and its intensity represents the value of the corresponding signal’s feature (e.g., Fig. 4).
Figure 4a illustrates an example where the condition of the inside surface of the pressure tube enables each feature to produce a clear view of the location and shape of the defect. However, this is not the general case as the presence of
various factors, such as foreign material or/and accumulated oxide on the surface of pressure tubes and within the defect, can cause additional signal scattering and reflections creating noisy patterns that are more challenging to be addressed by the features (e.g., Fig. 4b). The random behavior of these factors poses a problem for modeling and predicting the degree to which they affect the performance of the features in each unique pressure tube environment. Therefore, the proposed methodology utilizes the full set of equally weighted features to represent the signals in the unsupervised learning process.
III.C.Unsupervised Signal Analysis
III.C.1.DBSCAN Clustering Algorithm
The problem of grouping together unlabeled ultrasonic signals is being approached by an unsupervised clustering machine learning algorithm called DBSCAN (Ref. 13). DBSCAN is based on the idea that data points in dense regions will form a cluster while data points from different clusters will be separated by low-density regions. This approach differs from other clustering algorithms, such as k-means14 and mean shift,15 where the clusters are defined by their centers. This causes them to underperform when processing nonspherically shaped clusters.
An illustration of its capabilities, versus k-means and mean shift, is shown in Fig. 5, which illustrates their inability to handle arbitrarily shaped clusters. It also shows another disadvantage of k-means, which is the predefined number of clusters. Since the proposed application is aimed at handling inspection signals, the algorithm should be able to determine the different (a priori unknown) number of groups and not force the data to fit the assumptions about the data set. The three advantages of DBSCAN that are critical for our application are
Fig. 4.  Examples of C-Scans generated for two areas containing defects, utilizing the values of individual features.
Fig. 5. Comparison of k-means, mean shift, and DBSCAN (Ref. 16).
1.detection of arbitrarily shaped clusters
2.no assumption about the number of clusters
3.detection of noise and outliers.
DBSCAN requires the following two input para-meters: eps; which is the maximum radius of the neigh- borhood; MinPts; which is the minimum number of points in the eps neighborhood of a point. DBSCAN operates by iteratively distinguishing each data point as one of the following types (Fig. 6):
1. core point: a point with a dense neighborhood
Fig. 6. Example of DBSCAN clustering with parameters
MinPts ¼ 3 and eps ¼ radius.
2.border point: a point that belongs to a cluster but its neighborhood is not dense
3.noise point: a point that does not belong to any cluster.
III.C.2.Feature Standardization
After the feature extraction step, each signal is represented by its corresponding set of feature values. This enables greater computational efficiency during the subsequent clustering procedure due to the inherent reduction of the search space. Preceding the clustering procedure is a preprocessing step that reformats the features onto the same scale (feature scaling). This is required by algorithms that use distance metrics (such as the Euclidean distance) because the rescaled values of the features will ensure that the computed distances are not dominated by features with intrinsically large numeric values.
Two common approaches to scaling are normalization and standardization. Normalization is often approached as a case of min-max scaling where the feature values are rescaled to a range of [0, 1]. This work uses the standardization approach, which rescales the feature values so that they are recentered around zero (zero mean) with 1σ. The calculation of the new standardized value xðiÞ
expressed by Eq. (1):@1
where x is the sample mean of the particular feature and σ
is the corresponding standard deviation.
III.C.3.Two-Stage Clustering
After preprocessing, the standardized features are processed by the first stage of the clustering procedure using the DBSCAN algorithm. This step aims at reducing the size of the sample by eliminating as many healthy signals as possible and isolating signals of ambiguous nat- ure. The output of this clustering is a label attached to each unique feature set, indicating the class/group to which it belongs. These labels are also mapped back to any samples that did not participate in the calculations because they shared one of the unique sets of feature values. Given the unbalanced nature of the data sets—i.e., the healthy section of the tested area is larger than the defective section—an assumption is made that the group with the larger number of members belongs to the healthy section; thus, the remaining groups contain potential defective areas or noise. Therefore,
only the smaller groups of samples will proceed to the next clustering stage.
The samples that proceed at the second stage of the clustering procedure are represented only by their location properties, i.e., axial position and rotary position, and are all considered as potential defective signals. The dual purpose of this stage is the following:
1.Eliminate outliers/noise by identifying samples that are not members of the healthy group and are located in a sparse neighborhood.
2.Group together samples that are not members of the healthy group and are located in a dense neighborhood.
This step is essential for formulating the final group comprising samples that are members of the defect. It provides the means to group together signals that, although obtained from a defective region, might not be initially grouped together, which is a consequence of the diverse characteristics that constitute a defect and their different impacts on the reflected signals. Therefore, location-based clustering aims to regroup those signals together, utilizing the fact they should be located in close proximity.
The output of this location-based clustering is updated signal labels: Samples that belong  to  a group are classified as part of the defective region, and samples that were classified as noise/outliers are discarded as being members of the healthy region. Figure 7 provides
a high-level flowchart that summarizes the steps taken by the clustering procedure. This process can be applied to the different data sets obtained by each of the ultrasonic probes (APC, CPC, and 20-MHz NB).
IV.RESULTS
Figure 8 presents examples of C-Scans after applying the signal clustering procedure to three different indica- tions (areas that contain defects) for each of the data sets obtained by the different ultrasonic probes. Each pixel represents the label assigned to the corresponding A-Scan: White represents signals classified as healthy, and the darker colors represent defective signals. However, there are cases where locations of the healthy section are indicated as defective (e.g., the gray areas of Fig. 8a APC and Fig. 8b APC). This is a result of the different conditions of the pressure tube and the area surrounding the defect heavily affecting the propagating signals. However, the diversity of the probe configuration should enable future work to eliminate the noisy clusters by fusing the results of the different probes.
Currently, the algorithm requires manual tuning of a clustering parameter (eps). To explore the sensitivity of the system to the values of the parameter, the algorithm was applied to 37 unique indications, and the results were compared to the verified defect  dimensions  provided. Figure 9 presents the percentage of indications that each
Fig. 7. Flowchart of the clustering procedure.
Fig. 8.  Examples of C-Scans resulted from the signal clustering procedure.
Fig. 9. Application of different eps values to 37 indications. Percentage of achieved absolute width difference below 25%.
eps value was able to measure with absolute width differ- ence of less than 25%, for each of the ultrasonic probes.
The results indicate that no single parameter value can satisfy each of the unique indications. The amount of information about the defect that is available for extraction from a data set depends on the condition of the pressure tube (foreign material or corrosion), the characteristics of the defect, and the behavior of each inspection probe under the given former conditions. Therefore, there is a need for training the algorithm to automatically identify the most appropriate clustering parameter for each case.
V.FURTHER WORK
The most important step for refining this work is the implementation of a training procedure that will create a predictive model for providing the appropriate eps para- meter value given some characteristics of the tested area. Initially, this will require a training data set con- taining extracted attributes of known processed data sets, along with the eps value that produced the best result on each data set.
However, one factor is limiting the current work to approach the training procedure. First, there is a need  to define what makes a result better than another. By manually assessing the current produced results from various eps values, it has been identified that there are cases where the selection of the best result can be an ambiguous process. An example of this would be a result that matches the verified defect dimensions but also returns large amounts of noise, or a noiseless  result that underestimates the defect dimensions. It is
crucial to standardize the process of selecting the best eps for the known verified defects because they constitute the labels that will be used for the training process of the predictive selection model.
Furthermore, although the current work developed a framework that can be applied to data sets captured by ultrasonic probes of different configurations, it does not utilize the extracted information in a unified way. Fusing results obtained from different probes could potentially provide a more informed estimation of the dimensions and shape of the defect as well as elimination of noisy  clusters. The fusion of these results could be approached by treating each isolated probe model as a classifier and form an ensemble learning scheme.17
VI.CONCLUSION
Defects on the inside surface of CANDU pressure tubes facilitate DHC, which can lead to coolant leakage and can potentially damage the reactor. This work has introduced a new approach for identifying these defects through data- driven analysis of the available unlabeled pressure tube ultrasonic inspection signals. The framework uses simple descriptive statistics as features and a two-stage unsuper- vised density-based clustering procedure, and it was tested on real data sets obtained from the inspection of several pressure tubes. Initial results were discussed, with the method showing promise as a means to detect and measure defects. Furthermore, this paper discussed the limitations of the proposed system and proposed future steps to improve  its performance and eliminate the need for manually select- ing a clustering parameter.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank D. Hawthorne and Bruce Power for supporting this work.
As the aim of this research is to identify and isolate groups of signals, it is useful to condense the information contained in each signal (average of 490 data points of
Fig. 3.  Examples of A-Scans obtained by different probes from the same position.
