<title>Research on nuclear emergency decontamination technology based on strippable coating</title>
<Affiliation>1.Henan Key Laboratory of Special Protective Materials, 90 Wangcheng Road, Luoyang 471000, China;2.Institute of Defense Engineering, AMS, 3 Xishan Road, Luoyang 471000, China</Affiliation>
<author>Jing Wang· Guoquan Liu · Li Zhao · Shihe Wang· Jian Li</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-019-06790-5</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1007/s10967-019-06790-5</URL>
Abstract
Radioactive contamination caused by nuclear leakage accidents and radioactive source diffusion accidents will pose a threat to the environment and public safety. In order to remove the contamination, an emergency decontamination technique based on strippable coating was studied. The strippable coating takes acrylate emulsion as the main film forming agent and lauryl sodium sulphate as surfactant. The decontamination performance and application dosage of the coating were tested. At the application dosage of 2.5 kg m−2, the single decontamination rate reached 92.26% for uranium dust on concrete surface, which indicates this technology is a promising method for engineering decontamination.
Keywords Decontamination · Strippable coating · Decontamination rate · Concrete surface
Introduction
Although the applied technology of nuclear energy con- stantly improved, the threaten of radio contamination has always been unavoidable. For example, in the Chernobyl nuclear accident, Three Mile Island accident, Fukushima nuclear accident, the nuclear facilities under the accident conditions are at risk of nuclear leakage, which will cause varying degrees of radioactive contamination to the environ- ment and threat to human health [1–8]. In addition, nuclear and radiological terrorism events can also produce radioac- tive contamination [9, 10]. Therefore, to ensure the environ- mental radiation safety, different nuclear pollution removal methods have been proposed and widely studied, such as high-pressure water flushing method [11], soil shoveling method and strippable coating decontamination method [12–14]. However, high-pressure water flushing method will produce a large amount of radioactive waste water and cause secondary pollution. The soil shoveling method also produce a large number of radioactive contaminated soil and need a large amount of operation. Hence, the applied range of these methods are very limited.
The strippable coating decontamination method is a novel nuclear emergency decontamination technology. The tech- nology solves the disadvantages of the above two methods and has the advantage of single solid waste. It was reported that the decontamination technology was applied into Three Mile Island accident [15]. The so-called strippable coating decontamination technology is the application of strippable materials to contaminated surfaces by brushing or spray- ing. The radioactive dust was fixed on the contaminated surface. Through the process of permeation, adsorption and evaporation of strippable coating materials, the films embedding with radioactive dust were formed. Last, the films were stripped to remove the radioactive contamina- tion. The technology is used to remove contamination from dense surfaces such as stainless steel and glass [16]. How- ever, it is rarely reported to be applied on porous surfaces such as concrete pavement, because of the radioactive dust is difficult to remove when it falls into concrete voids. In order to improve decontamination rate on porous surfaces,we modified the formulation of strippable coating materials.Surfactants are the substances with fixed hydrophilic and lipophilic groups that can be oriented on the surface of the solution and significantly reduce the surface tension [17]. Surfactants have many characteristics, such as wettability, emulsibility, decontaminability and dispersibility [18–20]. In the synthetic process of strippable coating material,
Lauryl sodium sulfate (SDS) was added as surfactant to improve the wettability of strippable coating material on the interface between the material and concrete, so as to improve the decontamination rate.
In this study, the added dosage of SDS was determined by experiments. Then, the strippable coating material with advantages of fast and high-efficiency to remove radioac- tive dust was successfully prepared. In addition, the opti- mal amount of strippable coating material was determined through a large number of engineering decontamination experiments. The synthesized materials were successfully applied to remove uranium dust from the concrete grounds.
Acrylate emulsion as the main film forming agent was pur- chased from Guangzhou Mage Polymer New Materials Co.
Table 1 Performance parameters of acrylate emulsion
Fig. 1 The preparation process of the strippable coating materi- als Fig. 1 The preparation process of the strippable coating materi- als
Ltd. Lauryl sodium sulfate (SDS) as surfactant was obtained from Linyi Lvsen Chemical Co. Ltd. Antifoaming agent was received from Digao Chemical Company. Viscosity modifier was purchased from Sanofi Co. Ltd. The specific perfor- mance parameters of acrylate emulsion in the experiment are shown in Table 1.
The viscosity values were measured by the NDJ-8S digital viscometer (Shanghai Bangxi Instrument Technol- ogy Co. Ltd). The contact angles were obtained by the KJ-625 contact Angle tester which was purchased from Dongguan Kejian Testing Instrument Co. Ltd. The values of tensile strength were measured by JLD-10 rapid tensile tester (Hunan Xiangfeng Instrument Co. Ltd). The values of decontamination effect were received by PAM-170E surface contamination detector (VF Nuclear Instrument Co. Ltd, Czech Republic).
Preparation of strippable coating materials The preparation process of the strippable coating materials is shown in Fig. 1. Firstly, the main agent with the content in the formula was dissolved in distilled water. Then, putted
the solution under the dispersion plate, adjusted the rotation speed to 500 rpm and dispersed for 2 min. Then, surfactant was added into the solution with 500 rpm for 5 min. Last,viscosity modifier and antifoaming agents were added into the solution with 700 rpm for 5–10 min until the viscosity reached to 1800–1850 mPa s.
Process of emergency decontamination
The strippable coating materials with different formulations were sprayed on the contaminated surface by special spray- ing machines, radioactive dust would be absorbed or bur- ied. Then, the strippable coating materials would be dried and cured into films after a few hours. Last, the films were removed mechanically or manually to achieve the decon- tamination effect. The process of decontamination is shown in Fig. 2.
Characterization of the materials
The main performances of the stripping coating were the tensile strength of the film and the decontamination rate to uranium dust. The tensile strength tests of film materials were conducted with reference to GB/T 16777.
The abilities of decontamination mainly included the con- tact angle and the actual decontamination rate of the simples. The values of contact angle were determined by pendant- drop method. The actual decontamination rate of the coating material was measured by uranium dust with low activity. The uranium dust was sifted from uranium ore, with particle sizes ranging from 65 to 200 microns. The specific activity and particle size distribution of uranium dust were close to those of typical ash samples from Fukushima nuclear acci- dent, according to the reference [21]. In this study, 3 g ura- nium dust was evenly spread on the concrete surface with an area of 100 cm2 to prepare contamination surface. And then
measured the α and β radioactivity total counts before and after decontamination to calculate the single decontamina- tion rate of the stripping coating films. Three parallel sam- ples were tested to calculate the mean value. The specific measurement steps were as follows. Firstly, radioactivity counts before decontamination were recorded by measuring the radioactivity counts after spreading the uranium dust on the surface of flat concrete and subtracted the background counts. Then, spraying or brushing the decontaminant, peel- ing off and removing the film materials after the films were dried. The radioactivity counts after decontamination were recorded by measuring the radioactivity counts minus the background counts.
Results and discussion
Effect of acrylate emulsion concentration on strippable coating properties
Reducing the concentration of the main agent can improve the penetration efficiency of the emulsion and enhance the decontamination rate of uranium dust. In the experiment, different concentrations of basic emulsion were selected to test the performances of film-forming, tensile strengths and decontamination rate. The results were displayed in Table 2.
The results suggested that with the concentration of main agent decreased, the tensile strength decreased and the decontamination rate increased first and then decreased. The reason of the tensile strength decreased was that the thickness of the strippable coating films became lower with the concentration of the main agent decreased. The reason of decontamination rate increased first was due to the concentration of the main agent decreased,  the  fluidity  of  the  coating  material was
Fig. 2 The process of emer- gency decontamination
Table 2 Effect of different concentrations of acrylate emulsion on strippable coating properties
Fig. 3 Relationship between contact angle, decontamination and dop- ing different amount of SDS
increased and the formed film area of per unit mass strip- pable coating materials was increased. In addition, the increase of coating material fluidity could improve the coating’s ability to cover dust. Therefore, the decontami- nation rate was increased. When the concentration of the main agent was lower than 80%, the formed film was too thin or even incomplete, so the decontamination rate was reduced. Therefore, the optimal concentration of the main agent was 80%.
Optimization of the doping amount of SDS
In order to increase the effect of dissolution and decontami- nation, researchers often add amount of surfactant to the strippable coating materials due to surfactants have some specialties, such as moisten, emulsification, decontamina- tion and dispersion. In this study, different amounts of SDS were doped into the mixing solution to measure the effect of decontamination. The contact angles and the decontamina- tion rate of uranium dust were tested and the results were displayed in Fig. 3 and Table 3.
The results indicated that the decontamination rate increased rapidly at first and then tend to be balance with the content of SDS increased. When the doping amount of SDS increased from 0 to 6%, the decontamination rate increased significantly due to the wetting effect of emulsion to uranium dust was increased with the increase of surfactant content. The decontamination rate was almost steady after the con- tent of SDS above 6%. The reason was that the 6% SDS could made the emulsion wetted to uranium dust completely, and the decontamination rate was no longer increased after the doping amount of SDS over 6%. In addition, the contact angles decreased rapidly and decontamination rate increased when the doping amount of SDS increased from 0 to 6%. The reason was that when the surfactant concentration reached or exceeded the critical micelle concentration, the contaminated dust was embedded in the micelle center, thus the decontamination effect was improved. The contact angles decreased slowly and tend to be stable after the content of
Table 3 The single decontamination rate of the emulsion to uranium dust when doped with SDS
SDS above 6%. What’s more, the decontamination rate no longer increased. And the material began to produce a lot of foam, which affected the film-forming property. Therefore, 6% SDS was chosen as the optimal doping amount of SDS in the experiment.
Effect of the application dosage
of strippable coating material on emergency decontamination
After obtained the optimize strippable coating materials syn- thetic formula, the different amounts of strippable coating materials between 1.0 kg m−2 to 3.0 kg m−2 were tested to decontaminate uranium dust from surface. The results were shown in Fig. 4. Decontamination rate increased rapidly with the amount of strippable coating materials increased from 1.0 kg m−2 to 2.5 kg m−2 and tend to be stable after over 2.5 kg m−2. With the strippable coating materials dos- age increased, the amount of strippable coating materials per unit volume increased, which indicated that the solu- bility of strippable coating materials to uranium dust was increased, thus leading to a significant increase in decon- tamination rate. However, after the amount of strippable coating materials exceed 2.5 kg m−2, the strippable coating materials dosage was excessive compared with the quantita- tive uranium dust, the decontamination rate was no longer significant increased and tend to be stable. Thus, 2.5 kg m−2 was chosen as the optimal dosage in this study. The optimal dosage may change when the conditions of the contaminated surface change. For example, when the amount of radioac- tive dust changes significantly, the optimal dosage needs to be determined through the above series of decontamination tests. The optimal dosage of strippable coating material was
Fig. 4   Different  amounts  of  strippable  coating  materials   between
1.0 to 3.0 kg m−2 to decontaminate uranium dust
used in concrete pavement under laboratory conditions and engineering conditions, the results were displayed in Fig. 5.
Conclusions
In this study, a novel nuclear emergency decontamination technology based on strippable coating has been studied, and the coating material with acrylate emulsion as the main film forming agent has been successfully prepared. When the concentration of the main agent is 80%, the film form- ing and decontamination properties of the coating are better for use. The strippable coating has the advantages of simple preparation and fast removal of the radioactive dust with  a high decontamination rate. Adding appropriate SDS can improve the wettability of the strippable coating to radioac- tive dust, so as to improve the decontamination rate. The optimal doping amount of SDS was 6%. What’s more. The nuclear emergency decontamination technology has been applied to a large area radioactive decontamination under engineering conditions. The suitable dosage of the coating material on concrete grounds was more than 2.5 kg m−2.
Fig. 5 The photos of decontaminate process under laboratory condi- tions (a, b) and engineering conditions (c)
Under the optimal condition, the single decontamination rate of the strippable coating on concrete surface reached 92.26%. In summary, the technology provides a new option for nuclear emergency decontamination.
Acknowledgements This work was financially supported by Out- standing Talents Innovation Foundation of Henan Province (No. 154200510029).
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest Their authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
