<title>HTGR – NEW PROSPECTS FOR NUCLEAR ENERGY</title>
<Affiliation>Afrikantov Experimental Design Bureau of Mechanical Engineering (OKBM Afrikantov), Nizhnii Novgorod, Russia</Affiliation>
<author>N. G. Abrosimov, N. G. Kodochigov, L. E. Kuznetsov, V. V. Petrunin,
N. N. Ponomarev-Stepnoi, and Yu. P. Sukharev*	</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-021-00709-8</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00709-8</URL>
High-temperature gas-cooled reactors (HTGR) are a new type of environmentally clean source of nuclear energy. Their unique properties – capability of generating heat at temperatures to 1000°C and a high safety security – determine the wide possibilities for using reactors of this type to produce hydrogen from water, supply heat for technological processes in different industries, and produce electricity very efficiently in a gas-turbine cycle. Currently, OKBM Afrikantov is working jointly with Russian enterprises on the develop- ment of a nuclear power plant + hydrogen energy plant (NPP-HEP) with HTGR and a chemical-technology part for hydrogen production. This work should result in a decision on the construction of the lead block of NPP-HEP with HTGR and a chemical technological part for hydrogen production. The implementation of this project will contribute to the solution of the global problems of decarbonization and growing con- sumption of energy and it will stimulate the formation of a new technological order – hydrogen energetics.
In practice, high-temperature gas-cooled reactors (HTGR) are viewed as a new type of environmentally clean, gen- eral-purpose, nuclear source of energy. Their unique properties – capability of generating heat at temperatures reaching 1000°C and high safety security – determine the wide possibilities of using a reactor of this type for producing hydrogen from water, supplying process heat in different industries (chemical, oil refining, metallurgical, and others), and electricity genera- tion with high efficiency in a gas-turbine cycle.
On account of the design characteristics of the core and fuel, HTGR possess the property of intrinsic safety in respect to stopping the fission chain reaction, cooldown, and confinement of fission products. These properties eliminate core melt- down during accidents, including complete loss of coolant in the primary loop. There is no need to shelter and evacuate the population residing in the vicinity of a power plant.
At OKBM Afrikantov (hereinafter – OKBM) work on HTGR commenced in 1973 on the initiative of A. P. Ale- ksandrov and F. M. Mitenkov. A technical task was developed for a 1000 MW(t) VG-400 pilot nuclear power facility. This project was regarded as a base for building commercial plants for various power-engineering applications. A large number of organizations and institutes in the country were recruited for this work: Kurchatov IAE, NPO Luch, VNIPIET, Orgstroiproekt, NIIAR, NIKIMT, TsNII KM Prometei, and others. Draft and technical designs were developed, phase-one R&D work was conducted, and a technical project was coordinated with regulatory oversight agencies. In 1989, a technical design was de- veloped for a pilot low-power reactor installation HGM with HTGR, whose main equipment designs were based HG-400 equipment, which greatly reduced the volume of experimental work.
In subsequent years, the designs of the pilot HG-400 and HGM formed the basis of detailed studies of the com- mercial (serial) power-engineering facilities, including HG-400-T for the production of process heat, HG-400-GT for the production of electricity in a gas-turbine cycle, ASPT-HG-500 for a nuclear plant for supplying industrial heat, HGM-P   and HGM-PG for supplying heat to oil refining plants, and other uses. These works served as a basis for the government decision in 1987 to build two pilots NPP-HEP with HG-400 and HGM and four industrial installations – two with HGNat the Novopolotsk Chemical Combine and two with HG-400 as part of the Kotlass Chemical Combine and Nizhnekamsk Petrochemical Combine, and one pilot installation with HTGR at NIIAR. The scientific and technical level of the developed designs corresponded to promising foreign designs and surpassed the latter in terms of individual metrics. On the subject of HTGR, the staff at OKBM defended six Candidate dissertations, and several hundred Inventor’s Certificates were awarded for inventions, many of which were realized in designs.
Changes in the country’s economic order in the 1980s halted the development of nuclear energy as a whole and did not permit realization of the HG-400 and HGM designs. An experimental base, which included tens of research facilities and testing stands, on which a large volume of studies and complex testing of equipment were performed, was created for valid- ating the HTGR designs at OKBM and other organizations and institutes. In all projects OKBM served as the principal de- signer of reactor installations.
In 1995–1998, OKBM together with the NRC Kurchatov Institute, Bochvar VNIINM,NPO Luch, and other Russian enterprises in cooperation with firms and national laboratories in the USA, France, and Japan developed a conceptual design of a high-temperature modular helium reactor with a gas turbine GT-MGR. The scientific and engineering resources de- veloped during the work on HTGR were used in its development. Prismatic FA and ceramic microfuel as well as innovative solutions for the energy conversion system, implementing a direct closed gas-turbine cycle, were used in the design. Owing to this, the plant efficiency reached 48%. The direct closed gas-turbine cycle combined with a modular reactor design created the prerequisites for lowering the construction, operation, and maintenance costs by simplifying the electricity generation scheme and reducing the number of safety systems.
Analytical studies validated the possibility of using GT-MGR to resolve the problems of managing the long-lived actinides separated during reprocessing of spent fuel from power reactors. The resistance of GT-MGR fuel to deep burnup makes it possible to utilize the radioactive wastes by placing them in spherical microparticles with ceramic coatings, similar to the GT-MGR fuel composition.
At the beginning of the 2000s, a draft design of a nuclear installation with GT-MGR for the production of electricity in a direct gas-turbine cycle was developed with the participation of American specialists as part of the Russian-American agreement between the Rosatom State Corporation and the US Department of Energy. Also within the framework of inter- national cooperation:
–in 1998–1999, OKBM together with the NRC Kurchatov Institute, NPO Luch, SF NIKIET, and TENEX working to order and jointly with the firms ESKOM and PBMR (SA) participated in the development of a conceptual design of a modular commercial HTGR with direct gas-turbine cycle PBMR, where the design and the possibility of using Russian ex- perience in designing and developing equipment and components were evaluated and conceptual designs of a turbogenerator and the safety and control system of a pebble bed modular reactor (PBMR) were developed;
–in 2001, OKBM under contract with the Institute of Nuclear Energy Technology at the University of Tsinghua (PRC) developed a draft design of an energy conversion block for the Chinese reactor HTR-10;
–in 2015–2016, OKBM together with NRC Kurchatov Institute, NIAEP, Atomproekt, Bochvar VNIINM, NPO Luch, and other Russian enterprises as part of a contract with the National Atomic Energy Agency of Indonesia developed for Indonesia the conceptual and technical design of a reactor installation with the RDE experimental reactor.
In 2003, OKBM together with the NRC Kurchatov Institute and VNIPIET completed detailed studies of the MGR-T high-temperature reactor for hydrogen production. The technical solutions for the main equipment and the configuration of the reactor installation were largely based on the solutions used in the GT-MGR design. The design was developed in several modifications, differing by the method of hydrogen production in the chemical-technological part. Variants of hydrogen pro- duction by means of high-temperature electrolysis of water and steam conversion of methane were studied in detail.
Evaluations of the technological application of HTGR designs for hydrogen production showed prospects for con- siderable expansion of the possibility of non-electrical application of nuclear energy on a scale comparable with that of elec- tricity. Especially promising is the use of these reactors for the production of artificial, environmentally clean, motor fuel – hydrogen and hydrogen-containing energy carriers.
The GT-MGR and MGR-T designs meet, in terms of their metrics, the requirements of the promising Gen-4 nuclear technologies.
Currently, as part of the fulfillment of the task “Development of nuclear-hydrogen energetics for a large-scale pro- duction and utilization of hydrogen,” which is part of the complex program “Development of technologies, techniques, and scientific research in the field of the utilization of nuclear energy in the Russian Federation to 2024,” OKBM together with NPO Luch, FTsNIVT SN PO Eleron–VNIPIET, NRC Kurchatov Institute, VNIIAS, and other Russian enterprises are studying in detail NPP-HEP with HTGR and the chemical-technological parts for hydrogen production. This work should result in 2024 the decision to build the lead block of NPP-HEP with HTGR and the chemical-technological part for hydrogen production.
The realization of NPP-HEP with HTGR and the chemical-technological part for hydrogen production will contrib- ute to the solution of the global problem of decarbonization in an environment with growing energy consumption and stimu- late the formation of a new technological order – hydrogen energetics. To realize this high-tech direction, Russia possesses raw material resources (water, natural gas, nuclear fuel) and a unique knowledge base accumulated in the course of research and development work on nuclear-hydrogen energy.
The adoption of nuclear-hydrogen energetics and the use of hydrogen in energy-intensive industrial processes and in transportation will reduce emissions contaminating the atmosphere.
International collaboration on nuclear-hydrogen energetics will accelerate the formation of the hydrogen-energetics order and the solution of the problem of global warming. In this connection the development of international cooperation on HTGR, including for expanding cooperation, is actual.
