<title>A kinetic sensitivity analysis for the SO2 and NOx removal using the electron	 beam technology</title>
<Affiliation>a.Institute  of  Nuclear  Chemistry  and  Technology,  Dorodna  16,  03-195,  Warsaw,  Poland
b.Chemical  and  Biochemical  Engineering  Department,  University  Politehnica  of  Bucharest,  Polizu  1-  7,  011061  Bucharest,  Romania</Affiliation>
<author>Ewa Zwolińska, Valentina Gogulancea, Yongxia Sun, Vasile Lavric, Andrzej Chmielewski</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.05.004</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.05.004</URL>
ABSTRACT
The mathematical modeling of the phenomena taking place during the electron beam ﬂue gas treatment is a complex endeavor due to the diﬀerent time scales of the processes occurring as accelerated electrons are bombarding the ﬂue gas. The paper presents a complex kinetic model for these gas phase interactions, consisting of 1034 chemical reactions with the participation of 115 reactive species. The mathematical model couples the complex gas phase kinetics with a liquid phase kinetic model, taking into account the nucleation and  condensation phenomena occurring due to the presence of sulfuric acid. The modeling results for both coupled and uncoupled gas phase kinetics are validated against a set of literature experimental data with satisfactory outcome. The work aims to identify the most important chemical reactions inﬂuencing the pollutants removal, proposing a sensitivity analysis using the concept of generated entropy. To the best of the authors’ knowledge a sensitivity analysis of this extent has not been performed for the electron beam ﬂue gas treatment. The results of this analysis emphasize the link between the removal eﬃciencies of NOx and SO2, the importance of hydroxyl radicals and can aid in future model reduction eﬀorts.
Keywords: Sensitivity analysis Kinetic parameters Electron  beam Flue gas
1.Introduction
In the past, industrial development was inseparably connected with increasing pollution of the entire natural environment. Presently, with environmental protection such an important global issue, research is focused on the improvement of existing methods to make industry more environmentally-friendly, as well as developing new technologies that do not negatively impact the air, water or soil.
Two of the most common air pollutants are sulphur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxides (NOx). The NOx abbreviation refers to all nitrogen oxides, including: N2O, NO, N2O3, NO2, NO3 or N2O5. The most widespread pollutants, i.e. present in the highest concentrations, are NO and NO2 (Skalska et al., 2010). Both these compounds, as well as SO2, are toxic to humans and animals and cause multiple respiratory diseases. Furthermore, these toxic gases result in acid rain and eutrophication, as well as tropospheric ozone accumulation (United States Environmental Protection Agency, 1998).
Sulphur and nitrogen oxides are mainly produced during the combustion of fossil fuels, for energy production (power plants), road and marine transportation, etc. Energy demands and the resultant combustion emissions are increasing globally, forcing the environmen- tal protection sector to improve the current methods of pollutant
removal from oﬀ-gases (European Environment Agency, 2015).
The conventional methods, such as Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) for NOx removal and Wet Scrubbing (ﬂue gas desulphurization – FGD) for SO2 removal, have the signiﬁcant advantages of high removal eﬃciency and are cost-eﬀective, but also have notable drawbacks. These include the signiﬁcant amount of waste produced when cleaning oﬀ-gases, such as gypsum slag, wastewater or spent catalyst. As a result, researchers have been studying the possibility of improving these conventional methods for the post-combustion treatment of exhausts. Other research has focused on developing new alternatives, in an eﬀort to overcome the current limitations of the methods employed for removing SO2 and NOx. One such promising alternative method to traditional technologies is the electron beam treatment, which is a highly eﬃcient, waste free solution that is capable of simultaneously removing NOx and SO2 (Sun et al., 2016).
The electron beam ﬂue gas treatment (EBFGT) was set up for the ﬁrst time in the 1970's in Japan (Chmielewski, 2007) and was further developed in the following decade in diﬀerent countries, e.g. Japan, China, Poland, Bulgaria, Germany and USA. In the ear1y 1990's two pilot plants were built in Poland (Chmielewski et al., 1993, 1995) and Japan (Namba et al., 1995), with the ﬁrst industrial installations built soon after, in Poland (Szczecin, Electropower Station “Pomorzany”)
(Chmielewski et al., 2004) and China (Chengdu) (Doi et al., 2000). Their reported performance led to the construction of other installa- tions in Bulgaria, China and the Middle East.
The electron beam technology is a so-called dry-scrubbing treat- ment, where SO2 and NOx are removed from the ﬂue gases mainly through oxidative reactions, leading to the formation of acidic com- pounds, later neutralized by ammonia to yield the useful by-products (NH4)2SO4 and NH4NO3.
Previous studies demonstrated that the most important species that are generated during irradiation (formed from water vapor) are the oxidizing radicals ∙OH and HO2∙ and excited species O (1D) (Chmielewski, 2007).
The following products are involved in the oxidation reactions of NOx and SO2, Eqs. (1)–(6):
@1
@2
@3
@4
@5
@6
The ﬁnal addition of ammonia creates a by-product, a mixture of ammonia sulfate and nitrate, which can be captured and recycled as agricultural fertilizer:
@7
@8
@9
@10
The formation of (NH4)2SO4 proceed via two mechanisms: radio- thermal (reactions 6, 8–10) and thermal (reactions 11–15).
@11
@12
@13
@14
@15
The removal eﬃciency of NO and SO2 are strongly inﬂuenced by experimental parameters such as dose, temperature and the presence of other compounds e.g. CO2, NH3 or scavengers like alcohol (Chmielewski et al., 2002). To further increase the removal eﬃciency while maintaining a lower energy requirement, the electron beam was coupled with other techniques such as corona discharge reactors (Lazaroiu et al., 2007) or microwaves (Lee et al., 2009).
The biggest advantage of EBFGT is the simultaneous removal of NO and SO2 without producing waste water, but instead an ammonia-based by-product, useful as agricultural fertilizer. On the other hand, the primary limitation of this process is its very high energy usage, employed for the electrons’ generation and acceleration. Despite this, the energy is more eﬃciently used, being directly transformed to chemical energy and not to heating energy, as is the case of the conventional technologies. Stasiulaitiene et al. Stasiulaitiene et al. (2016) carried out an environmental impact analysis using the  life cycle assessment (LCA) methodology, which compared traditional technologies with non-plasma treatment methods. The results showed that the EBFGT is a promising method, superior in what regards the human toxicity and acidiﬁcation/eutrophication potential, due to the lack of waste production and the reduced environmental impact of the ammonia fertilizers. However, EBFGT's high-energy demands lower its overall rating, the technology performing poorer overall than the ensemble of SCR and FGD.
2.Mathematical model and sensitivity metrics
Despite the decades of industrial experience, the process is still not fully mapped and the control of various process parameters in order to achieve optimal removal with minimum energy consumption remains largely unconsidered. Developing an adequate mathematical model of the process is, thus, of utmost importance as it enables the rigorous study of the main reaction pathways and, implicitly, process parameters leading to pollutant removal.Due to the complex nature of the process and the diﬀerent time scales associated to the interactions between the fast electrons,molecular, radicalic and ionic species, most of the modeling studies dedicated to the EBFGT employ medium sized kinetic models (Bulearcă et al., 2010; Lowke and Morrow, 1995; Zhang et al., 2009; Zhao et al., 2005). While the bulk of modeling studies only consider the gas phase phenomena, others use coupled gas-liquid models (Gerasimov et al., 1996; Gogulancea and Lavric, 2014; Norman et al., 2013), taking into account the sulfuric acid nucleation and subsequent absorption and chemical reactions occurring in the liquid phase. However, there are only a handful of publications that include a comprehensive number of reactions (Mätzing, 1991; Penetrante, 1996; Schmitt et al., 2009), even if the larger reaction data pool is believed to give a more complete and rigorous overview of the irradiation process. What is more, such a large kinetic set was, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, never coupled with a liquid phase model that also considers the absorption of several species and their transformation under the eﬀect of ionizing radiation. In addition to this, the validation of said mathematical models is seldom performed using experimental data collected for a wide range of operating conditions, as proposed in this paper.
2.1.Mathematical model
The mathematical model developed in this work employs a complex kinetic system, in an eﬀort to identify the most important pollutant removal pathways during the electron beam ﬂue gas treatment.
The model considers the reactor to be represented by a unit volume (NH ) SO of 1 cm3 of perfectly mixed gas and follow this unit volume along the reactor. Thus, the mass balance equations are written for a discontin- uous ideal reactor, using time coordinates, which then can be easily transformed to space (volume or length) coordinates.
In order to quantify the accelerated electrons – ﬂue gas interactions, information regarding the electrons’ path through the irradiated medium, the energy loss through collisions with the gas molecules  and the spatial energy distribution of the electrons is required. The computations associated with these phenomena are strenuous and can be performed via Monte Carlo simulations in order to determine the electrons trajectory and their relative spatial distributions (Hovington et al., 1997). Classical mechanical theories can also be applied to calculate the electrons’ trajectories (Aerts, 2014), neglecting the kinetic energy loss due to collisions as the plasma state formed is non- equilibrium, i.e. the kinetic energy of the electrons is  much  higher than that of the surrounding molecules.
In addition to the information concerning the fast electrons, the rates of the ionization, dissociation, excitation and recombination reactions must be evaluated, an eﬀort complicated by the time scale of  the  processes  (10−14–10−7 s).  Due  to  the  complex  nature  of  the primary accelerated electrons – ﬂue gas calculations, a microscopic modeling of the energy deposition process and the active species generation has not, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, been performed in connection with EBFGT. Instead, the preferred method  to quantify these interactions is through the use of radiochemical yields or G-values, deﬁned as the number of molecules destroyed or formed per 100 eV of absorbed ionizing energy. The G-values employed for the primary radiolysis of N2, O2, H2O and CO2 are presented in Eqs. (16)–(19) in the form of stoichiometric coeﬃcients, being originally proposed by Willis and Boyd (Willis and Boyd, 1976) and updated by Mätzing (Mätzing, 1991). This approach assumes that the energy absorption and the reactive species generation can be regarded as a quasi-continuous process. Moreover, it is believed that the number of reactive species being produced by the absorption of 100 eV of energy is constant, regardless of the kinetic energy of the accelerated electrons generated.@16
@17
@18
@19
The accumulation of the active species generated following the interactions between the accelerated electrons and the main gas species  interactions between the accelerated electrons and the main gas species is computed using Eq. (20):
@20
where Ci
(20)
is the concentration of species i, which is generated from either N2, O2, water vapor or carbon dioxide, with the corresponding molar fraction Xsg in the ﬂue gas, while D* is the dose rate (the amount of energy absorbed by unit mass of material in unit time) and ρ represents the density of the gas phase. Due to the small molar fraction of the pollutants, the direct interactions between them and the fast electrons have a negligible inﬂuence on the removal process.
For the interactions between the reactive species themselves and the reactive species and ﬂue gas components, we aimed to develop a comprehensive kinetic model, taking into account several reaction pathways neglected in our previous work, e.g. the negative ions and ion hydrates chemistry. The kinetic model of the gas phase was obtained starting from the simplest model identiﬁed, proposed by Nishimura and Suzuki (Nishimura and Suzuki, 1981) and successively adding the reactions proposed by Zhang et al. Zhang et al. (2009), Schmitt et al. Schmitt et al. (2009) and Mätzing (Mätzing, 1991), while updating several conﬂicting reaction rate constants using the NIST Chemical Kinetics Database. This kinetic system takes into account 1034 chemical reactions and 115 chemical species, fully listed in the Supplementary Material.
The mass balance for the ionic, radicalic and molecular species involved in the considered reactions, was written as a system of ﬁrst- order diﬀerential equations, amending Eq. (20) to take into account the formation and disappearance due to chemical reactions.
Due to the diﬀerences in the time scales of the radiolysis phenom- ena, the resulting system of ordinary diﬀerential equations is extremely stiﬀ and was solved using Matlab's (MathWorks®, Natik, MA) built-in routine ode15s.
The initial predictions of the gas-only model, presented in the Results and Discussion section show a good agreement with published experimental data and a suitable sensitivity to the variations in the irradiation dose magnitude and initial pollutant concentrations.
After the gas-only model was validated against the experimental data, the inﬂuence of the liquid phase formed because of sulfuric acid nucleation was investigated. The assumptions for the liquid phase mathematical model are presented in detail in our previous work (Gogulancea and Lavric, 2015), together with the kinetic model considered for the liquid phase. The nucleation phenomena were modeled using empirical equations to estimate the number and composition of the liquid droplets while the absorption phenomena
were modeled using solubility coeﬃcients. The dissociation of the species in the liquid was described using equilibrium equations for the mass and charge balances. The presence of these non-linear algebraic equations transformed our previous system of stiﬀ diﬀerential equa- tions into a system of diﬀerential algebraic equations (DAE) which was solved using an in-house written integration routine, based on Gear's method for stiﬀ diﬀerential equations.
The results of the gas-liquid model validation eﬀort, presented in the Results and Discussion section, show an increase in the overall eﬃciency for both pollutants over the gas-only model, in some cases bringing the modeling results closer to the experimental ones.
2.2.Sensitivity analysis
In conventional local parametric sensitivity, the concept of sensi- tivity coeﬃcient is deﬁned as the percent change in the trajectory of f, at any point t with respect to a percent perturbation of the system parameter ϕ (t) as presented in Eqs. (21), (Maria and Dan, 2011):
@21
As an alternative metric to the sensitivity coeﬃcients in Eq. (21),  the entropy of a bounded function was employed in this paper, a concept paralleled to Shannon entropy, Eq. (22).
@22
where S is the entropy, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and pi is the probability of a microstate.
The entropy of a bounded function, similarly to the concept employed in statistical mechanics, is deﬁned as the degree of disorder imparted on the trajectory of a function by a signiﬁcantly small perturbation of one of the state variables. The practice was originally detailed and implemented in previous works (Lavric et al., 2005, 2006). In the case of the present sensitivity analysis, the removal eﬃcien- cies are regarded as bounded implicit functions of time, through the chemical species’ concentrations (state variables). In the analysis, the system parameters considered are the reaction rate constants employed in the kinetic model, their change resulting in changes of the time-
dependent concentration proﬁles.
Let's denote the removal eﬃciency with f (x(t), ϕ (t), t), where x(t) is the vector of state variables and ϕ (t) represents the model para- meters’ time evolution.
For the purpose of this sensitivity analysis, the probability of a  microstate in Eq. (22) was replaced with the fraction represented by the ratio of the actual relative value of the function (f (x(t), ϕ (t), t) − m) at any speciﬁc  state,  x(t),  and  its  maximum  amplitude  of  variation  (M − m), where m and M are the minimum and the maximum, respectively, values of the function (the removal eﬃciency for the considered pollutant) over the bounded interval (irradiation period). Therefore, the microstate probability can be replaced with a probability function  associated  with  the  trajectory  of  the  removal  eﬃciency,     f (x(t), ϕ (t), t), deﬁned using Eq. (23).
@23
This probability represents, in fact, the covering fraction of the amplitude of variation, so its values are conﬁned between 0 and 1.
With the aid of this probability function, the entropic density of a bounded function is deﬁned, Eq. (24), analogous to Eq. (22):
@24
The entropic density is always positive, and also bounded between 0 and 1.
Using Eq. (24), the mean entropy of the bounded function is computed
@25
where the Boltzmann constant is replaced by the reciprocal of the irradiation time, 1 .
tend − tbeg
In order to characterize quantitatively the sensitivity of the ﬁnite
state trajectories to any kind of perturbations, the generated entropy was employed  as  metric,  obtained  by  replacing  in  Eq.  (23)  f (x(t), ϕ (t), t) with  g (t, ϕ, ϕ*) = f (x(t), ϕ*(t), t)  − f (x(t), ϕ (t), t),  where ϕ*(t)  repre- sents the perturbed value of parameter ϕ. The generated entropy would, then, be:
@26
where the entropic density (24) should be computed using g (t, ϕ, ϕ*) in (23), instead of f (x(t), ϕ (t), t).
The algorithm was implemented in Matlab, while the sensitivity calculations used as input data the simulation results obtained by varying each of the 1034 reaction rate constants by ± 20%.
3.Results and discussion
The validation of the mathematical model was performed by comparing the simulation results with a set of experimental data, which were recorded and published by Chmielewski et al. (2000). Diﬀerent operating conditions were applied to each experiment, vary- ing the process temperature, humidity, irradiation dose, residence time, (as the irradiation was double stage, the time was also doubled), initial pollutant concentration and the ammonia- to- pollutants molar ratio.
The composition of the ﬂue gas (excluding H2O vapor, NO, NH3 and SO2, which changed with diﬀerent experiments) was as follows: O2
−5%, CO2 −10%, while the N2 concentration was calculated to complete the mass balance.
3.1.Model validation
The experimental and modeling conditions are presented in Table 1, with the comparisons between the modeling and experimental results shown in Table 2 and Fig. 1 (for NOx removal) and Fig. 2 (SO2 removal). The correlations between the experimental and modeling results for both SO2 and NO are satisfactory, with mean relative deviations of 9.5% and 11.5%, respectively. As the modeling deviation is similar for
Table 1
Experimental and modeling conditions (Chmielewski et al., 2000).
Table 2
A comparison of experimental (Chmielewski et al., 2000) and modeling results.
both pollutants, one can conclude that the proposed model can predict with good accuracy the behavior of NO and SO2 under diﬀerent treatment conditions.
Modeling results show that for higher initial concentrations of SO2 the removal of the pollutant signiﬁcantly drops (experiment 3). A similar eﬀect is observed when the irradiation dose is low (experiments 10, 11 and 12). However, the experimental results are not as sensitive to dose as the modeling process and demonstrate a higher response to changes in humidity (experiments 6 and 9). Another parameter that has a negative eﬀect on the removal eﬃciency of SO2 is the reduced time of irradiation (experiments 7, 8, 19).
The modeling results for the NOx removal eﬃciency show depen- dencies like those exhibited by the removal eﬃciency of SO2. The standard deviation for NOx is slightly higher than the generally accepted experimental deviation of 10%. However, due to the complex- ity of the experimental eﬀorts, the agreement is deemed satisfactory.
The removal eﬃciency is highly aﬀected by the dose of the irradiation (experiments 10, 11, 12) with the model appearing to be more sensitive in comparison with the experiment. Conversely, the modeling result's response to changes in humidity is not as signiﬁcant as the experimental results indicate. The reduced time of irradiation has a negative eﬀect upon the removal eﬃciencies, which is similar to SO2 removal behavior.
Some of the modeling results for SO2 and NOx show abnormal trends. For example, a comparison of the results for experiments 1 and 2, where during the experiments the removal eﬃciency for NOx decreased and SO2 increased, whereas modeling showed opposite trends. The conditions (lower humidity, equal dose, similar irradiation time, higher NOx and lower SO2 concentrations and lower ammonia content) support the experimental results when only a small rise in temperature would explain the increased removal eﬃciency of NOx. Another example of a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the trends was observed for the experiments 7 and 8. The modeling results show no diﬀerence, whereas there is a signiﬁcant rise in the experimental removal eﬃciency of NOx and a drop in the removal  of  SO2. However, in this case the operating conditions support the modeling because the only parameter changing is the ammonia content that should not cause such a large variation in the results, especially for NOx.
The addition of the liquid phase phenomena leads to an increase in the removal eﬃciency for both NOx and SO2 (presented in Table 3),Fig. 1. Experimental vs. modeling NOx removal eﬃciency.
more signiﬁcantly in the SO2 case where the eﬃciencies are approach- ing 100% for experiments 1, 2, 4, 16, 17 and 18. This leads in turn to   the improved removal of NOx, which follows the same trends predicted by the gas-only model. As the nitrogen oxides are signiﬁcantly less soluble than both sulphur dioxide and ammonia, this eﬀect can be attributed to the increased availability of radical species rather than to their absorption in the liquid phase. In fact, the simulation results for both pollutants show the same removal trends as in the case of the gas- only model. This brings the gas-liquid simulation results closer to the experimental ones in the cases where the gas model underperformed and predicted a lower removal eﬃciency than that experimentally obtained.
3.2.Sensitivity analysis
To provide a more detailed investigation, a sensitivity analysis was performed, following the principles presented in the previous section.The simulations were conducted using the treatment conditions pre- sented for experiment 20 in Table 1, while the removal eﬃciencies were computed by running the simulations for the ± 20% values of the reaction rate constants presented in the Supplementary Material. The cumulative generated entropies for both the removal of NOx and SO2 are presented in the Supplementary Material, along each reaction.
The results of the sensitivity analysis show that the most important reactions contributing to the removal of NOx (Fig. 3) are represented by the NO oxidation to nitrous acid (Eq. (27)) and sulphur dioxide's removal reactions with the hydroxyl radical, Eq. (28), and ammonia, Eq. (29).
@27
@28
@29
Fig. 3 shows that, in the case of NOx, for the ﬁrst second of the irradiation treatment, the most important reactions impacting the oxides’ removal are the oxidation reactions NO undergoes with the participation of the hydroxyl radicals, coupled with the reduction by
∙NH radical, Eq. (30).
@30
However, as the irradiation treatment proceeds, a shift in the importance of these reactions occurs: at the 2.97 s mark, the reaction between ammonia and SO2 appears to develop a larger inﬂuence on the nitrogen oxides’ removal rate. This reaction is to be dethroned shortly after (at the 3.07 s mark) by a third one, which also does not involve either of the nitrogen oxides’ participation: the formation of the
Fig. 2. Experimental vs. modeling SO2 removal eﬃciency.
Table 3
A comparison of experimental (Chmielewski et al., 2000) and modeling results.
bisulphite radical via the sulphur dioxide oxidation by the hydroxyl radical.
The SO2 oxidation to the bisulphite radical consumes the hydroxyl radicals present in the gas phase and, as the irradiation progresses, it becomes more and more signiﬁcant. The large values of the cumulative generated entropy for the rate constant of the SO2 involving reactions can be regarded as evidence of the strong link between the two pollutants’ removal eﬃciency. In fact, as the SO2 removal proceeds with a higher velocity, this will reﬂect in the removal rate of NOx. Moreover, it can explain why the higher SO2 initial concentration favors the removal of NOx and a lower initial amount of nitrogen monoxide has a beneﬁcial impact on SO2 abatement. In support of this hypothesis, reaction 31 below is the second most important for the NOx removal eﬃciency, after the 6 s mark.
@31
In what regards the reactions involving NO, its oxidation to HONO represents the fourth most signiﬁcant reaction, passing to the ﬁfth place  and then sixth place after approximately 2.7 and respectively 3.2 s.
Another interesting fact is the absence of NO2 generating or consuming reactions from the top seven most inﬂuential interactions according to this analysis. While present among the determining reactions for SO2 removal (see Fig. 4), the NO – NO2 equilibrium makes the shift accompanying the variations in the reaction rate constants have a low impact on the overall removal of NO and NO2.
The ﬁrst ranked reaction involving nitrogen dioxide is represented by  the  ionization  of  NO2,  transforming  into  NO2−,  Eq.  (32)  and  it  is shown to make an impact, around the 2.5 s time-step, when the value of the generated cumulative entropy ranks it 14th in the order of importance with respect to NOx removal eﬃciency.
@32
The relatively large values of the sensitivity metric for reactions 33 and 34, also highlight the signiﬁcance of the negative oxygen ions and their hydrates. However, the impact of these reactions diminishes as irradiation proceeds, as is underlined by the behavior of the entropy generated by reaction 34, which over the course of 3.5 s falls from position 10–25 in order of importance.
@33
@34
@35
In what regards the ammonia inﬂuence on the NOx removal, the sensitivity analysis showed that the most important reactions in which ammonia species are involved, aside from those listed in Fig. 3, involve the formation of the amidogen radical (which consumes hydroxyl radicals) and its transition back to ammonia with the formation of a nitrogen monoxide molecule, Eqs. (36) and (38). This can explain the slight drop in the removal eﬃciency of NOx when using high initial concentrations of ammonia at higher reaction temperatures, as these conditions will favor the latter two reactions and diminish the rate of SO2 removal pathways, increasing the competition for ∙OH radicals. Reaction 37 represents one of the source reactions for amidogen radicals and the sensitivity analysis shows its importance to gradually decrease, as the ammonia is consumed, in opposition to reaction 39 which gradually increases in importance over the last 3 irradiation seconds.
@36
@37
@38
Fig. 3. Cumulative generated entropies for NOx removal.
Fig. 4. Cumulative generated entropies for SO2 removal.
@39
The initial concentration of oxygen in the gas phase also impacts the successful removal of NOx, as is shown by the cumulative generated entropies of reactions 40–41, which underline the importance of ozone generation.
@40
@41
For the SO2 removal eﬃciency, the cumulative generated entropies show that the main removal mechanism is represented by the thermo- chemical pathway, as it displays the greatest sensitivity to the reaction rate constant variations, for the entire time of the irradiation treatment. However, the SO2 direct oxidation with ∙OH radicals shows the relative importance of the radio-chemical pathway, being the second most important reaction up until the last half second of irradiation.
All the reactions listed above have a similar impact on the SO2 removal, ranking slightly diﬀerent than for NOx, appearing, never-theless, in the selection of the 25 most important reactions. However,	2	2
the values of the cumulative generated entropy for the SO2 removal eﬃciency are smaller than those corresponding to NOx removal, for the majority of reactions, as can be seen from Figs. 3 and 4. This observation is supported by experimental experience, which shows that the removal eﬃciency of SO2 is not as sensitive to changes in the operating conditions.
The formation of the HOSO2O2 plays an important part in the removal mechanism of SO2, as does the reaction between the afore- mentioned complex and the pollutant, Eq. (42).
@42
Another important reaction pertaining to the thermal mechanism is the formation of the second ammonia – sulphur dioxide complex – Eq. (43); whose value of the generated cumulative entropy ranks the reaction in 7th place by the end of the irradiation period. As was the case for the NOx removal, the reactions consuming ammonia are important contributors to the pollutant's removal eﬃciency, even though their corresponding metrics are lower than in the case of NOx, even for the SO2 – NH3 interactions (see Fig. 4).
@43
The relatively high inﬂuence of reactions 27, 44–47 are strong indicators that the NO concentration signiﬁcantly impacts the removal eﬃciency of SO2 as well and that the amount of hydroxyl and oxygen radicals is limiting the overall process eﬃciency.
@44
@45
@46
@47
The water vapor present, apart from generating the primary hydroxyl and oxygen radicals as a result of irradiation, inﬂuences the overall removal eﬃciency of both pollutants. The most important reactions in terms of generated cumulative entropy  are represented  by Eq. (48) for NOx and 49 for SO2. The fact that these reactions do not rank similarly according to the associated generated entropies implies that the species of interest are the nitrogen and oxygen radicals, respectively,   and   not   the   H2O+   generated.   While   the   cumulative entropies for both pollutant removal's are similar for reaction 49 (ranking it at number 20 for SO2 and 53 for NOx), for reaction 48 the values are two orders of magnitude smaller in the case of SO2 compared to NOx. This is explained by the low concentration of N+ ions and the reduced contribution of the nitrogen radicals to the removal mechanism of SO2.
@48
@49
3.3.Model reduction
For the model reduction purposes, we identiﬁed and eliminated 86 reactions that showed a zero generated cumulated entropy of the NOx and SO2 removal eﬃciencies as a result of the reaction rate constants’ variations. The zero values for the generated entropy imply that the respective reaction has no impact on the removal eﬃciency of both pollutants. These reactions occur during the irradiation treatment, but as they are not inﬂuencing the eﬃciency of either pollutant's abate- ment, to ease the modeling eﬀort, they can be neglected.
Due to the fact that the majority of the chemical species appearing in the aforementioned reactions were also contributing to other chemical processes with non-null cumulative entropies, the model retains 110 of its original 115 species. The species that can be neglected are N +, the two excited states of N , hydrogen peroxide and the excited state of NO, as they only appear in the eliminated reactions.
The chemical reactions identiﬁed to have a zero generated entropy
are identical in the case of SO2 and NOx, highlighting once more the strong link between the two pollutants’ removal eﬃciencies.
4.Conclusions
The mathematical model proposed in this paper predicts with suﬃcient accuracy the behavior of the sulphur and nitrogen oxides during the electron beam treatment of exhausts. The modeling resultsare in satisfactory agreement with experimental data, showing relative deviations around 23% for NOx and close to 18% for SO2 for the gas- only model. The coupling of the liquid phase phenomena leads to an increase in the mean relative deviations, reaching for both pollutants around 25%. However, both models show a suitable sensitivity to the variations in operating conditions, in particular to the irradiation dose and humidity content. The addition of the liquid phase phenomena produces overall a better explanation of the coupled removal of the pollutants, despite showing an increase in the metric for the modeling- experimental departure. The computed removal eﬃciencies show that lower radiation dosage and humidity, coupled with a relatively short irradiation period, result in the lowest removal eﬃciency for both pollutants. The modeling data are showing a poor sensitivity to temperature variations, in contrast to the experimental values, but this is explicable since the vast majority of the reaction constants are not Arrhenius functions of temperature.
The main goal of the sensitivity analysis was to oﬀer additional insights into the mechanisms governing the pollutants removal during the EBFGT. The analysis performed in this paper shows a very strong connection between the pollutants’ removal eﬃciencies and the con- centration of the main oxidizing agents, in particular HO∙ radicals, present in the gas phase. The simulation results emphasize the link between the SO2 and NOx concentrations that leads to a better removal of either pollutant. The sulphur dioxide's removal is mostly aﬀected by changes in the rates of the thermo-chemical reaction with ammonia, while several reactions compete in the case of NOx during the irradiation period. Perhaps most surprising, in the last two thirds of the treatment time, the reaction that produces the highest variation in NOx's removal eﬃciency is between sulphur dioxide and ∙OH, leading to a decrease in the hydroxyl radical concentration. The results support the statement that the competition for the hydroxyl radicals is the main issue to be overcome in order to achieve a better removal of the pollutants.
Another beneﬁt of the sensitivity analysis is that it enabled the kinetics’ simpliﬁcation, throughout the removal of 86 equations and 5 chemical species, for which the cumulative generated entropy was zero. Although the number of eliminated reactions is relatively small compared to the total number of reactions considered in the model, it proves that the procedure can be of use for further model reductions and parameterizations to lower the computational time.
Acknowledgments
Valentina Gogulancea would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support received from the Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources Development (SOP HRD), ﬁnanced from the European Social Fund and the Romanian Government under the contract number POSDRU/159/1.5/S/137390.
