<title>Development and Assessment of a Diversity and Defense-in-Depth Strategy for the TerraPower TWR-P Advanced Nuclear Power Plant</title>
<author>Baofu Lu, Eric Williams, Jerry Mauck, Michael Howard, Richard Wood & Edward L. Quinn</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.TerraPower, Instrument and Control Systems Development, 330 120th Avenue, NE, Suite 100, Bellevue,
Washington 98005
b.TerraPower, Reactor Safety Analysis and Instrument and Control, 330 120th Avenue, NE, Suite 100, Bellevue,
Washington 98005
c.Technology Resources, 5234 Green Bridge Road, Dayton, Maryland 21036
d.Zachry Nuclear Engineering Inc., CSA—Analysis Division, 410 Memorial Drive, Suite 205, Idaho Falls, Idaho 83402
e.University of Tennessee, Engineering & Science Annex, 1412 Circle Drive, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996
f.Technology Resources, 23292 Pompeii Drive, Dana Point, California 92629</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2017.1416878</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2017.1416878</URL>
Abstract — The purpose of this paper is to provide an overview of the development and assessment of      the Diversity and Defense-in-Depth (D3) strategy for the  TerraPower  Traveling  Wave  Reactor-  Prototype (TWR-P) advanced nuclear power plant. The TWR-P  digital  control  system  (DCS)  is  currently being designed by TerraPower. The instrumentation and control (I&C) design and configura-  tion were based on standard digital control products. The control systems making up the DCS were  selected because of their applicability to the functions required by TerraPower and the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The installation of a digital-based plant protection system and other systems throughout the TWR-P enhances safety in many areas when compared to the previous generation of analog-based instrumentation systems.
Nuclear facilities have increased their use and reliance on digital technology in systems and  equipment (e.g., I&C, electrical systems, and fluid systems). In addition to I&C, examples  of  safety- related equipment that may use digital technology include emergency diesel generators, pumps, valve actuators, motor control centers, breakers, priority logic modules, time-delay relays, and uninterruptible power sources.
In the United States and around the world, engineering and licensing activities in standards and guidance have been, and are being, developed to address this important consideration in protecting safety- related systems. This paper addresses the latest in standards and guidance development as well as a review of the application of this guidance in the specific case cited.
Keywords — Diversity and defense-in-depth, instrumentation and control, software common cause failure.
I.INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this paper is to provide an overview of the development and assessment of the Diversity and Defense-in-Depth (D3) strategy for the TerraPower
Traveling Wave Reactor-Prototype (TWR-P) advanced nuclear power plant. The TWR-P digital control system (DCS) is currently being designed by TerraPower. The instrumentation and control (I&C) design and configura- tion were based on standard digital control products. The control systems making up the DCS were selected
because of their applicability to the functions required by TerraPower and the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (NRC). The installation of a digital-based plant protection system (PPS) and other systems through- out the TWR-P enhances safety in many areas when compared to the previous generation of analog-based instrumentation systems.
The TWR-P PPS design incorporates the reactor shut- down system (RSS), the engineered safety feature actuation system (ESFAS), and post-accident monitoring system functions. The installation of a digital platform PPS that includes all the safety-related functionality presents a licen- sing challenge in that a postulated software common cause failure (SWCCF) on the digital platform might propagate in a manner that defeats the required safety functions. The TWR-P D3 evaluation described in this paper has demon- strated that there is sufficient D3 to cope with a postulated SWCCF within the two safety platforms in the RSS and ESFAS (i.e., software-based and programmable-logic– based platforms) and the applicable augmented quality con- trol systems.
A recently issued regulatory issue summary (RIS)
RIS-2016-05 (Ref. 1) identified concerns associated with embedded digital devices (EDDs) and states they should be part of the overall D3 analysis. As a result, the pro- spective use of these devices was treated in the TWR-P D3 analysis and the potential impact of a SWCCF is discussed for each of the identified EDD categories.
II.DESCRIPTION OF THE D3 ASSESSMENT
The D3 assessment considered four echelons of defense, as discussed and defined in NUREG/CR-6303 (Ref. 2):
1.nonsafety plant control systems
2.reactor trip system (RTS)
3.ESFAS
4.monitoring and indicator system.
The possibility of a common cause resulting in fail- ures to more than one echelon of defense was the pri- mary concern in considering postulated failures. These postulated failures affecting multiple echelons  of  defense can be caused by interdependencies between these echelons. Accordingly, the problem becomes one  of specifying the degree of dependencies since it is impossible to have four completely independent eche- lons when certain features must be shared due to the commonality of the I&C equipment and personnel. Physical and electrical independence represents  only  one of the dependencies considered in the analysis. Another interdependence evaluated is shared software
that can lead to failures between the echelons, hence a SWCCF.
The installation of a  digital-based  PPS  that  includes the reactor trip functions and the ESFAS func- tions presents a licensing concern that a postulated SWCCF of the digital platform  might  propagate  in  such a fashion that defeats the required safety func-  tions. Furthermore, there is a concern that using  the  same digital platform in nonsafety systems can result in accidents or transients that  are  outside  the  boundaries of those events discussed in the current safety analysis. The D3 evaluation described in this paper is  intended    to demonstrate that there is sufficient D3 to cope with      a postulated SWCCF for the TWR-P digital platforms    in the RSS, the ESFAS, and the other applicable safety and nonsafety control systems.
For new plants, the outcome of D3 evaluations typi- cally involves the addition of a diverse actuation system (DAS) that automatically actuates reactor trip and some selected ESFAS functions using a select group of input parameters and a diverse I&C platform. The DAS per- forms the required actuations, as determined through fail- ure consequence and/or probabilistic analyses, in order to compensate for failure of associated digital PPS (RSS and ESFAS) functions. The NRC Branch Technical Position (BTP) BTP 7-19 (Ref. 3) also allows credit for certain manual actuations using diverse indicators to guide the operator for proper operation of an anticipated trip with- out scram/trip (ATWS/ATWT) system and for proper operation of other digital platforms outside  the  one  being evaluated.
III.TWR-P D3 ASSESSMENT
The main objective of the TWR-P D3 assessment was to determine the vulnerability of  the  RSS/RTS  and ESFAS to a postulated SWCCF on the digital platform by performing a  systematic  assessment  of the proposed architecture. If design features were identified as being susceptible to SWCCFs and could impact the safety analysis, then the following actions were considered:
1.the architecture could be modified to remove the design aspects vulnerable to a common cause failure, or
2.the design could be modified to compensate for the identified vulnerabilities by implementing DAS functionality which includes ATWT func- tionality, or
3.best-estimate analyses could be performed to demonstrate the resultant plant response to the licensing basis anticipated operational occur- rences as well as the postulated accidents pre- sented in the plants’ safety analysis meet the acceptance  criteria  outlined  in  BTP  7-19  (Ref. 3).
Based on the D3 analysis specific to the TWR-P, the third option, above, was chosen.
Guidance presenting both the methodology and acceptance criteria for D3 assessments in support of the implementation of digital-based systems in the RSS and ESFAS at either operating or new nuclear power plants has been established. NUREG/CR-6303 (Ref. 2), BTP 7-19 (Ref. 3), and NUREG/CR-7007 (Ref. 4) document the methodology and acceptance criteria supporting DCS implementation. Based on the NRC position documented in BTP 7-19 (Ref. 3), the goal of the D3 assessment was to determine and correct potential vulnerabilities to unde- tected software common mode failures occurring with postulated initiating events. In addition, the goal of the D3 assessment was to ensure that automatic protective system response and/or operator manual actions have sufficient diverse instrumentation to support successful mitigation of the event. The effects of the combined initiating event resulting in a transient and SWCCF, including the sequence of events, were evaluated based on realistic assumptions.
The  D3  assessment  process  was  reduced  to  three
major process steps. The first step was to determine the susceptibility of the safety systems (PPS) to postulated SWCCF. This step was accomplished by reviewing the overall I&C architecture including both safety and nonsaf- ety systems due to the potential correlation between these systems. The architecture was divided into the four eche- lons discussed above. The objective of dividing the plant I&C systems into echelons was to segregate the equipment by function and then place them into the pertinent diverse blocks. The purpose of the blocks was to determine which systems may fail given a digital platform SWCCF, or any other plant software failure, and which systems may con- tinue to be available. The systems that were determined to be available could be either safety or nonsafety and include all passive systems. In addition, diverse manual actuations were credited as long as the necessary time was available and the proper indications and alarms were available given the SWCCF. To accomplish the block segregation, the diversity between the digital platforms was analyzed in accordance with the  guidance  of  NUREG/CR-6303 (Ref. 2)  and NUREG/CR-7007 (Ref. 4). The  goal  of the
analysis was to establish an acceptable level of diversity between each block based on six forms of diversity listed in NUREG/CR-6303 (Ref. 2). This was where the diver- sity between the components was examined, i.e., the microprocessor and field programmable gate array  (FPGA) platform and nonsafety digital platforms. For the case of the TWR-P analysis, acceptable diversity levels have been found between the Programmable Logic Controller, FPGA, and plant control platforms.
The second major step was to perform a best- estimate evaluation of the licensing basis event analyses to determine the sequence of events when including only the safety systems not impacted by the postulated SWCCF and the estimated timing of manual operator actions. This task was accomplished by first identifying the events presented in chapter 15 of the TWR-P licen- sing basis. Second, a review and evaluation of these chapter 15 events for relevance to the D3 analysis were undertaken. Events reliant upon concurrent initiating events were eliminated from the  assessment  list based on the best-estimate evaluation approach.
After choosing the events to be evaluated, a realistic sequence of events was determined. Note that the sequence for each event was based on conservative licensing basis assumptions such as including a loss of offsite power, single failure, stuck rod, etc. As part of a best-estimate evaluation approach, the plant initial conditions would be less severe than those analyzed and nonsafety-related systems would be credited to mitigate the consequences. Accordingly, the resulting event conditions for the best-estimate evaluation were less severe than the safety analysis.
The impact of the SWCCF to either of the diverse platforms, the microprocessor, or the FPGA-based PPS (i.e., essentially all PPS functions are unavailable under one of the platforms) was evaluated based on the sequence of events developed as described above. The main objective was to determine the  timing  of  key  phenomena  that could impact the progression of the accident scenario. Examples include items such as the availability of reactivity management during a main steam line break event and the onset of a Doppler feedback power reduction during a rod ejection event. After the evaluation of the sequence of events, if automatic safety or nonsafety functions were unavailable, a determination of available operator actions was made which could mitigate the postulated event with a concurrent SWCCF. Successful mitigation was based on not exceeding the acceptance criteria outlined in BTP 7-19 (Ref. 3). This task relied on experience and engineering judgment to deter- mine a more realistic sequence of events and identify which available control systems, functions, and manual operator actions could be credited to mitigate the event.
The best-estimate approach required that a decision be made as to whether the current acceptance criteria as listed in the TWR-P licensing basis should be maintained, or whether alternate acceptance criteria should be proposed based on BTP 7-19 (Ref. 3). This decision potentially has an effect on the time available for the operator to recover the plant and is also dependent on whether or not dose analysis will be performed in support of the best-estimate analyses. In this D3 analysis, the current acceptance criteria for each of the TWR-P licensing bases events was maintained.
For the third step, the results of this assessment were placed into categories that distinguish how the event can be mitigated, or in certain cases identified that it cannot be mitigated with the current design. The events that cannot be successfully evaluated to meet the acceptance criteria given the DCS design were specified for further evalua- tion. At the same time, the protective features that would be required to meet the acceptance criteria were outlined to specify a preliminary DAS, if required. This included both the automatic and manual functions along with the related input parameters required for each function. This provided the specification of a potential conservative DAS system that may be reduced in functionality after the best-estimate modeling of the selected group of events has been com- pleted, if required. The D3 assessment report is segmented into four classifications of diverse actions:
1.diverse automatic actuations and initiating parameters
2.system-level manual actuations and the neces- sary indications and alarms for the operator to take action
3.component manual actuations where the known time is such that the actions can be taken
4.a select group of diverse indications and alarms which are needed so that the operator can suc- cessfully manipulate the plant to a safe shut- down condition given the initiating events in conjunction with the SWCCF.
For each event, knowing the required operator actions for items 2 and 3 above was necessary to deter- mine if the operator can successfully mitigate an event based on manual actions. The following questions were addressed in making this determination:
1.Does the operator have sufficient indication to take the appropriate actions?
2.Is the appropriate instrumentation available and functioning?
3.Do operating procedures provide adequate guidance?
4.Does the operator have adequate training?
5.Does the operator have sufficient time?
The D3 report provides the summary results of the qualitative analyses for each postulated initiating event. The resulting mitigation category for each event and the necessity for operator actions and alternate mitigation functions, are provided. The D3 report breaks down each of the Postulated Initiating Events that require additional analysis and details the mitigating diverse actuation functions for each. As noted above, the preliminary results concluded that the TWR-P design has sufficient diversity in the two safety platforms to meet the acceptance criteria without the addition of a DAS.
All known safety EDDs were analyzed for their impact to the safety analysis upon a postulated SWCCF to each EDD system software block. Based upon this EDD analy- sis, it was concluded that these SWCCFs were within the envelope of the existing TWR safety analysis. Additional EDDs could be added as the TWR-P design is finalized and will be analyzed for their safety impact at that time.
After the categorization of all of the evaluated events, the preliminary TWR-P D3 report has been completed. The next phase of the D3 assessment is to perform an additional assessment on all events identified to require further evaluation found in the current analysis, either by performing a quantitative analysis, event simulation,  plant modification, risk-based analysis, or other resolu- tion. Completion of this assessment will demonstrate that these events are either bounded by a more limiting event, thus protected by a diverse automatic function embedded in the design, or successfully mitigated by manual opera- tor actions. The next phase analysis is intended to identify and resolve all remaining concerns by addressing any event in which the results of the qualitative D3 study showed that the plant design was questionable with respect to withstanding a SWCCF. The results of the best- estimate modeling and manual operator action analysis should enable the crediting of certain systems and manual actions discussed in the D3 report as being available to mitigate the event. After these steps, a final D3 report  will be issued that includes the quantitative review per- formed by TerraPower and will be ready for submittal to the appropriate owner and regulatory agency.
IV.CONCLUSION
The TWR-P D3 assessment has demonstrated that the I&C architectural strategy does not require the
addition of a DAS to provide sufficient D3  to  cope with a postulated SWCCF to the digital platforms in  the RSS, ESFAS, and the augmented quality plant control systems. It has been determined  that  even  with a postulated SWCCF there are adequate defenses and diversity in the current digital I&C architecture to meet the applicable acceptance criteria. The final D3 analysis results will be ready for submittal to  the  owner and the associated regulatory agency in the future.
