<title>A cascade intelligent fault diagnostic technique for nuclear power plants</title>
<author>Liu Yong-kuo, Ayodeji Abiodun, Wen Zhi-bin, Wu Mao-pu, Peng Min-jun & Yu Wei-feng</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China; b.Nuclear Power Plant Development Directorate, Nigeria Atomic Energy Commission, Abuja, Nigeria; cChina Nuclear Power Technology Research Institute, Shenzhen,China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1394228</DOI>
<URL> http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2017.1394228</URL>
ABSTRACT
Safe operation of nuclear power plant is one of the most important tasks in nuclear power devel- opment. This justifies the variety of methods that have been proposed to support the operators in the task of plant condition monitoring, fault detection, and diagnosis. A number of hybrid fault detection and diagnosis methods have also been proposed, with their attendant weaknesses. This work proposes the hybrid of principal component analysis (PCA), signed directed graph (SDG), and Elman Neural Network (ENN) for fault detection, fault isolation, and severity estimation, respectively. The proposed hybrid method is verified with the data derived from Personal Com- puter Transient Analyzer (PCTRAN) simulation. The verification result shows that the PCA-based fault detection methodology realized timely detection of anomaly in the simulated nuclear power plants system, the SDG-based fault recognition method was able to isolate the system abnormal- ity and identify the root causes, and the ENN-based fault severity estimation method presents the failure fraction of fault, representing the severity. With this integrated hybrid method, more fault information is provided for the operators, which serves as a good foundation for further decision- making and interventions.
KEYWORDS
Nuclear power plant; principal component analysis; signed directed graph; Elman neural network; fault diagnosis; severity estimation
1.Introduction
Nuclear power plant is a complex system, compos- ing different subsystems, with each subsystem having several components. In order to fully monitor the operational status of nuclear power  plant,  sensors  are arranged to measure the temperature, pressure, water level, flow rate, and other related parameters    in the system. Consequently, at each moment, the plant monitoring system will generate large amounts of measurement data. It is quite hard for the operators to get information directly from a large amount of  raw data. For instance, if different alarms are triggered because of the system anomaly, even a sufficiently trained operator may misjudge the plant status under great mental pressure. The Three Mile Island accident revealed how an incipient transient transformed into a severe accident because operators could not estimate the system state accurately in the face of voluminous information indicating an abnormal event. Hence, it is of great significance for the plant operational safety to ascertain the plant status through various efficient diagnostic algorithms, which may largely relieve the operator of mental pressure and as well reduce the probability of operator’s misoperation.
Many literature have surveyed fault diagnosis methodologies ranging from qualitative model-based methods to quantitative model-based and process history-based methods [1]. On account of the nuclear plants’ inherent complexity, it is difficult to establish
a quantitative physical model of nuclear power plant, so the application  of  physical  modeling  is  limited  in nuclear power plant fault diagnosis. Meanwhile, data-driven approach, such as neural networks and  its variants, presents flexible diagnostic techniques, applicable to complex systems. The Gaussian radial basis neural network has been applied to the problem of identifying nuclear accidents in a Pressurized Water Reactor (PWR) nuclear power plant [2]. A distributed fault diagnostic strategy with back-propagation (BP) neural network has also been used for local diagnosis for subsystems [3]. Gottlieb et al. [4] also presented a study on transient identification using support vector machines in nuclear power plants. The dimensional- ity reduction, noise filtering, and feature extraction capability of principal component analysis (PCA) methodology has been utilized for pattern recognition task using a case study of Bruce B zone-control level oscillations in Canada Deuterium Uranium (CANDU) reactors by Nasimi and Gabbar [5]. Yang et al. [6] developed a fault diagnosis expert system for marine nuclear power plants using multi-layer flow model incorporated with an expert system. Lind and Zhang [7] studied the application of multi-layer flow model in a PWR primary system and a primary heat transfer system of the Fast Breeder Reactor, and Liu et al. [8] presented a fault diagnosis method in nuclear power plant taking advantage of the graphical nature of signed directed graph (SDG) model. Qualitative models like
SDG are usually developed based on some fundamental understanding of the mechanism of the system, which is expressed in form of graph or tree structure describ- ing the causal relation between the parameters in the system; and the root causes of transients are obtained by inference and deduction. However, the sensitivity of diagnostic result from qualitative models is low due to the absence of quantitative information. For instance, estimating fault severity with qualitative model-based methods has limitations. Nevertheless, in comparison with other methods, the use of artificial intelligence or statistical methods to analyze process history data has produced improved results. Some of the lapses
encountered using  artificial  intelligence  methods  are being addressed by integrating two or more of these methods in hybridized fault diagnosis systems [9,10], although some of the hybrids lack explanatory implementation and may not be suitable for practical applications in operating plants. Moreover, upgrades and clarity of diagnostic task, process optimization, and improved performance are active requirements and constant area of research in the field of nuclear plant fault diagnosis. Our research work seeks to meet these requirements.
In this paper, we attempt to compensate for the weak- nesses in a qualitative model with the strength of quan- titative models to develop an integrated fault diagnos- tic system, capable of optimizing the detection, local- ization and severity estimation of faults and failures in  nuclear plants. The PCA-based method is used for fault detection; the SDG-based qualitative model is used for the preliminary diagnosis to recognize the fault type clearly, then the fault severity is estimated with an opti-mized Elman neural network (ENN). The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the fault detection based on PCA; Section 3 describes the fault diagnosis based on SDG; Section 4 describes the fault severity estimation based on the artificial neu- ral network. To test our integrated intelligence sys- tem, Section 5 shows the implementation of an inte- gral diagnostic method based on the PCA model, SDG model, and Elman network; Section 6 contains results and discussions, and the paper is concluded in the last section.
important features in data-set and reducing the dimen- sionality. PCA mainly transforms a number of related variables into fewer relevant variables and explains the variance and covariance structure of the data-set by a linear combination of a few relevant variables. Simply put, the overall goal of PCA is: data compression, rele- vant feature extraction, and explanation.
In PCA, we project an n-dimensional random vector t into a one-dimensional vector X (where l < m) with the eigenvectors pT as expressed in Equation (1):
@1
where the projection results in n-dimensional vectors called the principal components of the original data- set. The transformation computes a set of ‘loadings’ that explains the relevance of each data point to the prin- cipal component. These sets of ‘loadings’ are referred to as the eigenvalues and an array of the eigenvalues are called eigenvectors. The principal components are arranged in descending order; that is, the first princi- pal component is the one with the highest variance. The covariance matrix eigenvector, commonly known as the principal component of the load vector, contains the information about the relationship between variables. In fact, the principal component decomposes the origi- nal matrix into two parts: a part that describes the sys- tem changes, and another part that captures the noise in the system model. Optimization requirement demands that the latter part is eliminated. Assuming that the orig- inal matrix is decomposed, the individual variables in the original matrix are replaced by approximate vari-
ables, Xˆ , given by
@2
In PCA, the first principal component represents
the maximum variance; that is the maximum direc- tion of change of the data-set in a three-dimensional (3D) space. The second principal component represents the principal component with the second highest vari- ance, and the third principal component will be the axis with the third maximum variance. The principle of PCA states that the direction of the first principal component is orthogonal to the second principal com- ponent, and their total covariance equals zero. That is, the range of data in the first principal direction is the largest, the second principal component has the second largest, and the data points of the entire data-set are dis- tributed elliptically in the plane. The 3D spatial distri- bution of data-sets is actually derived from the PCA, ignoring the differences in the vertical direction of the elliptical plane. Thus, the PCA model can describe the principal variance in the data, with a lower dimension than the original data-set, and the key to the PCA cal- culation is to find the relevant directions that represent the maximum variance in the data.
2.2.Fault detection with PCA
The covariance of matrix X is defined as follows:
@3
As stated in Equation (2), the vector pi is the array of the loadings and they contain information on the rele- vance of the variables. If λ is defined as the eigenvalue of covariance matrix X, then,
@4
The eigenvectors (pi) corresponding to the largest eigenvalue (λi) are used to derive the approximate transformed random variable defined in Equation (2).
The scores (ti) are calculated as
@5
Fora new sample x, the error e is estimated using e =(x − x). The error e is defined as the error between the
original projected random sample x  and the  approxi- mation derived after transformation, and it is estimated using the statistical process error (SPE). The residual SPE corresponding to the sample x is given by
@6
A confidence limit can be calculated on SPE as follows:
@7
where cα is obtained from the normal distribution limits
for the upper (1 − α) percentile.
In order to perform process monitoring and diag- nosis with PCA, the PCA model of the normal oper- ating conditions of the system under consideration is constructed. The data from the normal operating con- ditions are normalized and the principal components are derived as described earlier. The PCA model thus obtained is utilized for process monitoring, by pro- jecting the online data onto the model and estimat- ing the residual SPE between the projected data and the model prediction. Whenever the residue gener- ated exceeds a certain predetermined limit, an excep- tion is flagged, indicating an abnormal situation. Pro- cess diagnostics using the PCA model are carried out by identifying and interpreting measurement variables that have significant and relevant contributions to the residuals. Another very useful property of PCA for fault diagnosis is its filtering capability. That is, reduction  of (irrelevant) dimension also serves the purpose of noise filtering, which is useful for diagnosing noisy sen- sor and detecting sensor drift [11]. Moreover, com- pared to other data-driven fault detection methods,PCA is attractive where the process parameters have high correlation and deviations resulting from rela-tively small events, which is a common characteristic of nuclear plant faults. Also, if properly implemented, PCA presents faster detection time and lower false alarm rate than other detection techniques, and it is capable of novel fault detection and easier to implement for mul- tiple faults [12].
3.Fault diagnosis based on SDG
3.1.SDG model
The SDG-based fault diagnostic method is first pro- posed for chemical processes, and it is defined as follows [13]:
@8
where V = {v1, v2,..., vn} is a set of nodes, repre- senting measurement parameters or fault root causes, E = {e1, e2,..., em} is a set of branches, character- izing the causal relation between different nodes, and ϕ: E → {+, −}, ϕ(ek)(ek ∈ E) is the sign of the branch ek; ‘+’ represents positive impact, and on the contrary, ‘−’ represents negative impact. ψ : V → {+, 0, −},
ψ(v j )(v j ∈ V ) means the sign of node v j, represent-ing the status of node, and the status is determined by the deviation between the actual node value x
Such that,
expected node value xv j , as shown in Equation (9):
@9
Consider a simple example of SDG consisting of four
nodes  (v1, v2, v3, v4) and  three  branches  (e1, e2, e3),
where e1, and e2 are positive impact branches charac- terized by solid lines and e3 is a negative impact branch characterized by dashed line. The status of all nodes  in a SDG model are definitive, that is, ψ is definitive in G = (V, E, ϕ,ψ), if ψ(v1 )ϕ(e1 ) ··· ϕ(em)ψ (vm) =
+, then the path that starts with v1, through e1 ... em,
and ends with vm is a consistent path in ψ -pattern. Briefly defined, a consistent path means the product of the starting node sign, and the signs on all the branches in the path and the end nodes are positive. For instance, if ψ (v2 ) = +, ψ (v4 ) = − or ψ (v2 ) = −, ψ (v4 ) =+ then the path v2 − e1 − e3 − v4 is defined as a consis- tent path.
3.2.Path inference in SDG model
The development of an SDG model is an important foundation in fault diagnosis. If the value of any node
Figure . Flowchart of SDG-based inference.
exceeds the predefined threshold, and the alarm is trig- gered, the root cause of the alarm is obtained by means of inference according to the causal relation among the nodes. The process involved in the inference is as shown in Figure 1.
Precisely, the inference of SDG is a process of path searching, and the target of the search is that all the consistent paths starting with the given alarm node are found, and the root nodes correspond to the root causes of the alarm. The uniqueness of SDG compared to other fault isolation technique is that the graphical nature of the technique makes it easy to explain fault propaga- tion and it easily shows which variable is associated with each fault case.
4.Fault severity estimation based on artificial neural network
4.1.Artificial neural network
Artificial neural network is a computational model implemented in custom-made hardware devices or soft- ware which attempts to imitate the structural, behav- ioral, functional, and adaptive features of the biological nervous system. An artificial neural network consists of interconnected neurons with intricate behavior. Artifi- cial neural networks possess the abilities of parallel pro- cessing in large-scale, distributed storage, self-adaption,
Figure . The architecture of Elman neural network.
self-organization, self-learning, which make it a great application in diverse fields [14].
BP neural network, a feed-forward multi-layer per- ceptron, is the most widely used neural network for classification and regression purposes [15]. BP neu- ral network is trained with an algorithm that back-  propagates the error through the network.
BP neural network is a feed-forward static neural network without any feedback loop, which means that all input signals flow in one direction, from the inputs to the outputs in the network. In a recurrent neural network (RNN), the outputs of some neurons are fed back to the same neurons or to neurons in the preced- ing layers, which means that signals may flow in both forward and backward directions. Compared with the RNN, BP neural network has a disadvantage of the slow convergence rate and local minima [16]. ENN is a type of recurrent network, and the architecture is as shown in Figure 2. ENN is useful for predicting sequential data, and its temporary memory is available in form of a  recursive loop in the RNN hidden layer that serves to preserve the output from the hidden layer from previ- ous time step to the next time step [17]. Its implemen- tation is by connections that enable parameter shar- ing in the hidden layers of one or more networks. In this work, ENN was chosen because of its suitability for patterns that changes with time; that is, it is suitable for dynamic, non-linear systems such as Nuclear Power Plants (NPP). UAlso, ENN can perform the dynamic mapping between the input space and the output space, having superior approximation and forecasting ability and fast convergence [18]. However, a major drawback for PCA is its sensitivity to outliers, although there are researches on advanced algorithms to compensate this weakness. In this work, PCA technique used for detec- tion purpose compensates for the drawback inherent in ENN.
4.2.Severity estimation based on ENN
It is possible to estimate the magnitude of a fault even for the same fault type because the variations in the val- ues of system parameters are different as the degree of
Figure . The steam ﬂow variations in diﬀerent fraction of MSLB.
severity changes. Hence, the fault severity can be esti- mated by tracking the variation in operational parame- ters. The result of analyzing simulation data has shown that there is a form of correlation between the trends in the variations of parameters and magnitude of faults. Some parameters show a step change after a certain fault occur, and show different variation as the degree of the fault changes. An example of such analysis is as shown in Figure 3. Similarly, Figure 4 shows the variation of  a system parameter (pressurizer level – time curve) as a function of the variation in fault severity in the system.
Hence, there exist some kind of specific  map-  ping relations between the severity and the varia- tions in the gradient or values of operational parame- ters: Severity = f (v1, v2,..., k1, k2,.. .). To obtain an estimate of how severe a certain fault or failure is, we
consider the mapping of the relation between the sever- ity and certain parameters value (v1, v2,.. .) or param- eter variation gradients (k1, k2,.. .), and such mapping is constructed using the ENN.
5.Integrating and evaluating the PCA, SDG, and ENN model
5.1.Simulation experiment description
To test the hybridized method proposed in this paper, a simulated PWR plant is considered. The PWR simulation is done on the PCTRAN developed by Micro-Simulation Technology. The result of the PWR simulation was used to develop the SDG model. Dur- ing the normal operation of the PWR, parameters’
Figure . The pressurizer level variations in diﬀerent fractions of LOCA.
Figure . A general framework for the diagnostic system.
current values and variations are obtained and stored in the database, and the status of each parameter is  confirmed. If there is any parameter variation beyond a certain predetermined value, it signifies anomaly and it is detected with the PCA model. The types of fault are determined via inference method from the established SDG model. Furthermore, for certain failure types such as pipe rupture, the failure fraction is estimated by the relevant neural network. A general framework for the diagnostic system is as shown in Figure 5.
5.2.Implementation of SDG model
SDG isa form of knowledge-based model, and to estab- lish an SDG model, a set of faults are preselected and designated, and then the parameters related to the des- ignated faults are selected. The relations between these parameters are analyzed and represented as the con- nection between the nodes. The analysis is based on the fundamental physics and operational principle of PWR. An example SDG model of the PWR primary coolant system is presented in Figure 6, and it involves
19 parameter nodes and 7 fault nodes as listed in Table 1.
5.3.PCA modeling
Using Equation (1), the 100 observations (data samples) of 19 predictor parameters are normalized, and then the covariance matrix of the normalized data matrix is cal- culated. Equation (4) was used to calculate the eigenval- ues of the covariance matrix, and the contribution rate and cumulative contribution rate of the corresponding principal components are determined. Figure 7 shows a graph that describes the contribution rate (variances) of each principal component, and the curve represents the cumulative contribution of the main components. The graph clearly shows that the contribution of the first principal component (38%) is much greater than the
Table . Parameter nodes and fault nodes of the SDG model of the primary coolant system.
contribution from the rest of the components. The con- tribution of the last few components is almost zero, and the cumulative contribution rate of the first 14 principal components is 98.811%. Subsequently, the load matrix and the score matrix are calculated to obtain the PCA model.
5.4.Modeling and training of the severity estimator (ENN)
In the simulated PWR, a few failure scenarios are con- sidered. The failure scenarios are referred to as rupture faults and an ENN model represents each of the rup- ture faults namely: Loss of Coolant Accident (LOCA), Main Steam Line Break (MSLB), Steam Generator Tube
Figure . An SDG model of the primary coolant system.
Rupture (SGTR) (A), and SGTR (B). The ENN is con- structed to map the relevant parameters and the failure fraction. The parameters related to the failure fraction are shown in Table 2.
... Sample set building
The supervised learning algorithm is used to train the ENN, and the training samples consist of input sets that are the values or variation in the gradients of the selected parameters related to the specific fault type, and the output sets are the failure fraction of specific fault type, as shown in Table 2. For each fault type, the fail- ure fraction within the given range in Table 2 is used as
input to the simulated PWR, and the process data under faulty condition are obtained. Then, the estimates of the selected parameters are extracted from the process data and variations are computed. Hence, the input sample data and the corresponding output, which is the prede- fined failure fraction, are obtained and normalized.
... ENN structural implementation
The number of neurons in the input layer and output layer of the neural network is determined by the dimen- sions of the input and output samples, respectively. As a result of few dimensions in the input data, the neu- ral network is designed with a single hidden layer and the number of neurons in the hidden layer is calculated
Figure . The PCA model.
Table . The selected parameters of severity estimation for rupture fault (inputs and output of the network).
using Equation (10) [19]:
h = 0.51 + ,0.12n2  + 0.43mn + 2.54m + 0.77n + 0.35
where h is the number of neurons in the hidden layer, n is the number of neuron in the input  layer,  and m is the number of neurons in the output layer. From Equation (10), using two output neurons (m = 2) and five input neurons (n = 5), in the input layer, the num- ber of neurons in the hidden layer is five and the opti- mum ENN network has the form 5-5-2.
The training process of the ENN involves the mapping of the input with the output data-set, and con- sidering our data-set, it is pertinent to compare the  performances of common learning algorithms on small-scale neural network. The learning algorithms compared are the BP learning algorithm and its vari- ant, and the algorithms of Levenberg Marquardt (LM) learning and evolutionary learning. The training error convergence curves of ENN with other learning algo- rithms are as shown in Figure 8. It is noteworthy that for small-scale neural network, the convergence rate of LM learning algorithm is faster than other algorithms [20]. Since the neural network under study is small scale, LM learning algorithm is considered for the optimal solution.
5.5.
Integral diagnosis system
The flow chart of the fault diagnosis system for nuclear power plant is shown in Figure 9. The three model- ing techniques heavily rely on our knowledge of the working principle of NPP, the system structure, and the offline data. The steps involved are as follows: The data obtained during the running of the simulated PWR is used by the PCA model to detect an anomaly. When the abnormal condition in the system is detected, the fault location is carried out by SDG model. ENN is then used to obtain the approximate degree of failure, and ulti- mately, the information on the abnormal and fault loca- tion is presented to the operator through the human– machine interface (HMI).
6.Case studies
6.1.Description of the simulated faults
The scenario is based on a two-loop pressurized water reactor simulated on PWR PCTRAN Version 4.0.8, which is a small simulation software developed by Micro-Simulation Technology. The integrated diagnos- tic method forms a fault diagnosis system for nuclear power plant and the schematic of the interface is as shown in Figure 10. The diagnosis system gets data
Figure . Error convergence of Elman neural network with other learning algorithms.
Figure . Flow chart of the fault diagnosis system for nuclear power plant.
directly from PCTRAN. The performance of our fault diagnostic system is verified by inserting different faults in the simulation and evaluating the response of our sys- tem to the faults. We started with a few system failure scenarios and the failures simulated are explained in the following sections.
6.2.Main steam line break (MSLB)
The MSLB failure is inserted when the PWR was under steady, full power operation for 20 s, and the failure
fraction is set to 50 cm2. In 2 s after the fault injection, the developed diagnosis system detects the occurrence of the failure, as shown in Figure 11.
Figure 11 is the SPE–time response curve, show- ing the detection result for the MSLB fault. The failure fraction is estimated by the trained ENN every second. The displayed fault information on the operator support HMI is shown in Figure 12, and fault location or iso- lation is done by tracking the fault propagation chains inferred from the SDG model. The fault propagation and analysis are as follows:
Figure . The fault diagnosis system for nuclear power plant.
Figure . Detection result for MSLB.
(1)Steam Line Break inside Containment → Steam flow of Steam Generator (SG) A → Feed-water flow of SG A → Narrow range level of SG A→ Power of SGA heat removal.
(2)Steam Line Break inside Containment → Steam flow of SG B → Feed-water flow of SG B → Nar- row range level of SG B → Power of SG B heat removal.
(3)Steam Line Break inside Containment → Tem- perature rise in reactor building.
(4)
Steam Line Break inside Containment → Pres- sure rise in the reactor building.
After the main steam pipe is broken, and  the  steam flows through the pipeline into the reactor containment, the temperature and pressure in the containment increase. The steam flow rate of the steam generator is accelerated by  the  steam  loss,  and the steam takes away the heat. Steam heat load increases, the steam generator feed water flow also
Figure . Diagnostic result for MSLB (inside containment), as displayed on the HMI.
Figure . Detection result for LOCA.
will rise, which is consistent with the parameters above.
6.3.Loss of Coolant Accident (LOCA)
The LOCA is inserted after the simulated PWR has been
The fault is detected and identified as LOCA in 3 s, as shown in SPE - time response curve of Figure 13.
Consequently, Figure 14 shows the fault propaga- tion chains inferred from SDG model, and the inference method is explained as follows:
running on full power for 20 s, and the failure fraction is(5) Loss of Coolant Accident → Volume of Reactor
set to 10 cm2. For all simulated faults, after fault injec-	Coolant System (RCS) liquid → Pressure of RCS.
tion, the simulation runs for 30 s, and the fault signa-(6)  Loss of Coolant Accident → Coolant flow of loop  A.
tures are used as the predictors for the model.
(7)
Loss of Coolant Accident → Coolant flow of loop B.
Figure . Diagnostic result for LOCA.
(8)Loss of Coolant Accident → Temperature rise in reactor building.
(9)Loss of Coolant Accident → Pressure rise in reactor building.
(10)Loss of Coolant Accident → Containment radiation dose increases in reactor building.
Apparently, after the loss of coolant, the pressure in the coolant system begins to drop, and the water level of the regulator decreases, while the flow rate increases. Agents flow from the pipeline into the containment, resulting in an increase in the shell temperature, pres- sure, and air dose rate. Figure 14 shows that there is con- sistency in the fault propagation path derived from SDG and the knowledge-based analysis above. Similarly, the failure fraction estimation curve in Figure 14 shows that as the fault is detected, the fault severity is estimated. That is, when the fault type is inferred from SDG model, then the relevant ENN is used to estimate the failure fraction; and the result of estimation is 10 cm2, being the approximation for the fault severity.
7.Conclusion
An integrated diagnostic method based on PCA, SDG model, and ENN is studied in this paper. PCA is applied to fault detection and the SDG model is applied to infer the fault location and construct the fault propagation chain. The mapping relation between the fault sever- ity and the related parameters is developed with the ENN, which forms the basis for quantitative estimation of the fault severity. The simulation result shows that the hybridized method was able to detect, identify, and diagnose faults including the failure type and the degree in an NPP, and the simulation analysis shows the follow- ing advantages:
(1)The method gives an accurate diagnosis of dif- ferent faults inserted in a simulated PWR, and quantitatively estimates the severity of those faults, thus serving as a validation of our pro- posed methodology.
(2)The graphical nature of the SDG fault isolation technique makes it easy to explain fault propa- gation and it easily shows which variable is asso- ciated with each fault case.
(3)Among the learning algorithms compared for the ENN severity estimation module, optimal solution is obtained with the LM learning algo- rithm and it was applied in the training of the ENN.
(4)The hybridized model results in an improved performance over the ones suggested in the ref- erenced journals.
However, because of the limitations in the PCTRAN simulations, the full scope of our proposal cannot be
investigated. For instance, the types of abnormality ana- lyzed are finite and are not a representative of incip- ient faults. This paper serves to verify the feasibility   of the proposed method. In our subsequent study, we will deploy more robust software with better simulation capability for investigating incipient and early faults diagnosis in NPPs.
Acknowledgment
This research work was funded by the  Research  on  the Key Technology of SDG-based Fault Diagnosis for Nuclear Power Plant (A project of the Reactor System Design Tech- nology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China); Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province, China [grant number A2016002], [grant number E2015053] and the National Natural Science Foundation of China [No.51379046]
