<title>SUPERCOMPUTER TWIN OF A NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTALLATION: DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACHES AND APPLICATION EXPERIENCE</title>
<Affiliation>OKBM Afrikantov, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia;</Affiliation>
<author>M. A. Bol’shukhin, V. A. Bolnov, A. V. Budnikov, M. N. Ereev,M. V. Zotova, I. S. Zotov, A. N. Lepekhin, V. A. Panov, V. V. Petrunin,S. A. Rogozhkin, R. I. Romanov, and V. I. Fomichev</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-021-00717-8</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00717-8</URL>
Abstract
Approaches to the technology developed by OKBM Afrikantov for creating a supercomputer twin of a nuclear power plant on the basis of a three-level model are described. A software implementation of this technology based on homegrown software is proposed. Experience in using the technology is shown for the Yasen-M project, RITM-200, and BN-800.
The capacity, reliability, and assigned life of different kinds of reactor equipment must meet heightened requirements together with reduced mass-size metrics and lower cost of the generated energy. Such problems require a new approach to design validation of projects, the introduction of modern tools for digitization, integrated computer-aided design systems, computational analysis, and validation of and training for production. The introduction of modern approaches to the compu- tational validation of designs is especially actual for the heightened safety requirements of nuclear plants and the long life cycle of NPP, and in the future it will make it possible to decrease the number of full-scale tests.
OKBM Afrikantov has accumulated experience in numerical simulation of the determining physical processes, including:
–analysis and validation of the neutronics metrics, core design and composition, efficiency of units and systems influencing the reactivity, means of neutron control, and nuclear safety conditions;
–analysis of thermophysical and thermomechanical processes, strength and service life of FA and cores in normal and emergency regimes, strength of equipment elements and systems of reactor installations, behavior of structures during thermal cycling and in the presence of radiation and dynamic actions;
–substantiation of the life metrics of the equipment and systems of reactor installations including beyond the limits of the assigned metrics, and development of methods for predicting their residual life;
–analysis of the thermohydraulics of the equipment and systems of reactor installations in static, dynamic, and emergency regimes, substantiation of design decisions in terms of pumping and heat exchange equipment, systems of normal operation and safety systems;
–analysis of the dynamics of reactor installations in normal maneuvering regimes, in the event of failures and disconnection of equipment, design basis and beyond-design basis accidents, including introduction of three-dimensional calculations;
–substantiation of the automatic control algorithms used in reactor installations, and development of computer sim- ulations and virtual power-generating units.
An extension of the development of design technologies is integration of calculations using individual software in a single complex, making it possible to perform a start-to-finish analysis of the characteristics of nuclear energy installations at all phases of their life cycle. To this end, a supercomputer twin of different kinds of nuclear energy installations has been developed.
In this article, approaches to the development of a supercomputer twin of a nuclear energy installation are presented, an implementation of the software is proposed, and an application is described.
Approaches to the creation of a supercomputer twin of a nuclear energy installation. Within the framework of the proposed technology, the supercomputer twin includes three levels of modeling detail.
The first level of detail is based on high-precision and high-performance three-dimensional modeling; it takes ac- count of non-isothermal currents of the coolant flows, the propagation of neutron flows to the ionization chambers, and the change in the physicomechanical characteristics of the structural materials. The first-level model makes it possible to perform multi-physical calculations of the operating regimes of the nuclear installation, including regimes with a change in the spatial orientation of the object.
An important phase in the development of the first-level model is the formation of an experimental database rep- resentative of the adaptation and verification of the three-dimensional thermohydraulic codes (CFD). To this end, OKBM together with Alekseev NGTU created an aerohydrodynamic testing laboratory, which is actively advancing. The specifics of the experiments performed in the laboratory for verification of three-dimensional codes consist in measuring the materials using flow-nonperturbing methods based on the use of laser measuring systems (PIV, PLIF, LDV), grid concentration sensors, and thermal imaging methods [1]. The experimental stands, utility models, and measuring methods used in the laboratory are being developed in scientific-technical collaboration with leading institutes in the country, such as IAP RAS, ICMM UB RAS, Lomonosov MGU, and ITP SB RAS.
As an example, Fig. 1 shows a model for studying the influence of thermocyclic loads on the equipment life (a) and a swing stand (b) as well as the results of thermal imaging measurements (c, d).
A level-2 model is used for engineering calculations with high detailing of the object’s systems. The list of model systems and equipment units is growing within the framework of the model. The present model was built based on engineer- ing codes and approximations of data obtained in multi-physical calculations, performed using an upper-level model, of the operating regimes of nuclear installations.
The level-3 model makes it possible to calculate the systems of an installation in real-time and takes into account the results of the upper-level modeling of processes. The primary application of real-time models is to improve the quality of in- tegrated hardware management systems and the embedded functional software. In this case, a level-3 model generates a flow of input data to debugged software, perceives the control information generated by the functional software, and reproduces the response to it of models of the controlled object in the same manner as the real system should respond to it. The result of the debugging of integrated control systems largely depends on the extent to which the real-time model correctly reflects the physical processes occurring in a real installation.
A hardware complex including the following has been created to solve such problems:
–a virtual control stand designed for interactive interaction with models of video frames and control panels of a nuclear energy installation and displaying the main design parameters;
–an instrumental server, providing storage of mathematical models and a base of verified initial data;
–workstations, making it possible to create and debug mathematical models, perform multivariate calculations; the instructor’s workplace when teaching personnel.
The control algorithms and regulation laws placed in the real apparatus of the projects which are under development are debugged at this complex.
Software implementation of the supercomputer twin. The homegrown computing codes are integrated into a single environment, including the following:
–LOGOS code package and FlowVision software system, implementing three-dimensional modeling of hydrody- namics and turbulent mixing, heat-and-mass transfer, kinetics of the stress-strain state and vibrations;
–Bort-T software package, which calculates non-stationary processes of shipborne nuclear energy installations, in- cluding intercoupled thermohydraulic and neutronics calculations of reactor cores;
–SAPR SimInTech software package, for modeling control systems and developing databases for equipment models;
–Vympel-Carlos-Norka software package, responsible for calculating the neutronics characteristics of cores;
–LUCKY code for calculating the spatial-energy distribution of the flux density of neutrons and photons.
A diagram of the integration of the program codes into a single environment is displayed in Fig. 2.
The supercomputer twin built for a nuclear installation on the basis of homegrown software makes it possible to simulate the behavior of a real object at different life-cycle phases. In the design phase, it is used to substantiate normal oper- ation regimes, regimes with equipment failure, sufficiency of the measures provided to prevent regime overflow into an emergency situation due to the actuation of the preventive protection or emergency reduction of power, emergency regimes with the aid of calculations, ensuring that the results are conservative from the standpoint of safety criteria, or the use of sta- tistical methods of realistic analysis with a conservative choice of equipment operating conditions, as well as determination of requirements for control algorithms, on the basis of conditions securing the required quality of transient regimes.
In the manufacture and delivery phase of a nuclear energy installation, the supercomputer twin is used to eliminate the characteristic deficiencies of the functional software of an integrated hardware management system, resulting both in longer times for developing and debugging algorithms as well as degradation of the overall quality of the system [2].
In the operational phase, the supercomputer twin can be used to develop systems for performing technical diagnos- tics and operational resource monitoring [3].
Results of using a supercomputer twin. Based on the results of using this technology, the possibility of moderating the power of the RITM-200 reactor installation when suppressing a portion of the heat exchange surface of the steam gener- ators was substantiated, the resource characteristics of the pressure compensation system were analyzed, the commissioning times were shortened when conducting interdepartmental tests of the Yasen-M project control system, the flow and mixing of the coolant flows at different temperatures in the upper chamber of BN-800 were analyzed.
The design of the improved integrated reactor installation RITM-200 was developed based on the creation of and experience in operating the reactor plants of nuclear icebreakers, taking into account current trends in the development of world nuclear energy. An installation with two 175 MW(t) reactors is greater than the KLT reactor capacity of nuclear ice- breakers 140–150 MW. At the same time, RITM-200 is almost two times lighter and more compact, correspondingly cheaper in terms of material consumption and takes up less space on the ship, therefore, it is more cost-effective. Structurally such a solution is achieved due to the integral layout, in which the steam generators previously installed outside the reactor are now situated directly in it.
The project substantiated more than a two-fold increase in the assigned service life of the main equipment of RITM-200 in comparison with the service life of the reactors of operating icebreakers. In particular, the resource of the cas- sette of heat exchange tubes of the steam generator is made possible by the modular structure, which allows the generator to remain operational in the event of interloop leakage. However, when a part of the heat exchange surface of the steam genera- tor was suppressed, the documentation allowed the operation of the reactor at capacity not exceeding 60%, which significantly reduced the technical and economic metrics and violated the concept of an integral layout of the primary-loop equipment.
Calculations of the primary circulation loop were performed using a supercomputer twin that was based on the use of verified CFD-codes and a unique bundle of programs, having no analogs in the world, for performing 1D–3D thermohy- draulic calculations (Fig. 3, 4).
The significant easing of the power limitations on suppression of a portion of the heat exchange surface of the steam generator and the absence of additional restrictions on the resource of the cassette of heat exchange tubes on suppression of the modules were largely substantiated on the basis of calculations. Thus, the costs of repairs in dry dock are substantially lower, and the downtime of a universal nuclear icebreaker associated with repairs of the steam generator is also eliminated.
Another example of the successful use of a supercomputer twin in the computational substantiation of RITM-200 is the analysis of the resource characteristics of the pressure balancing system. This system is the most highly loaded piece of equipment, which essentially determines the resource metrics of the installation as a whole [4]. The supercomputer twin per- mits quite accurate modeling of not only the non-isothermal flows in the equipment of reactor installations, accurately taking into account flow features such as the anisotropy of turbulence in the flow and the influence of buoyancy on the process but also describing complex non-isothermal, elastoplastic, deformation processes (Fig. 5). Numerical studies justify extension of
the assigned life of RITM-200 to 3.2·105 h.
Another example of the effective use of a supercomputer twin is the reduction of the commissioning times when performing interdepartmental testing of the complex system managing the technical means of Yasen-M project. With the
Fig. 1. Model of displacement unit and a swing stand.
Fig. 2. Software implementation of the creation of a supercomputer twin of a nuclear energy installation.
Fig. 3. Average temperature in the discharge and pressure chamber of RITM-200 on a single scale (a) and with an individual scale (b).
Fig. 4. Average temperature in the discharge chamber of RITM-200 in different sections.
Fig. 5. Numerical studies of the thermohydraulics (a, b) and stress-strain state (c, d).
Fig. 6. The velocity field (a) and temperature distribution (b) at the level of the centers of the lower windows in the shell of the BN-800 protection rods.
combined efforts of specialists at OKBM and the Central Design Bureau – designer and developer of the control system – bench testing was conducted on the basis of a real-time model. The reliability of the implementation as well as the complete- ness and consistency of the developed control algorithms were checked in the tests. All dynamic regimes provided by the algorithms of the nuclear energy installation’s control system were checked using the real-time model. These regimes include input, power maneuvering, change of operating regimes, processing on the nuclear energy installation’s equipment failure signals, compensation of operator errors and withdrawal of the nuclear installation with the use of different combinations of cooldown channels in the case of concomitant malfunctions in its control system. The checks revealed remarks, incomplete correspondence of the implemented algorithm to the design algorithm, inconsistency of the signals of intersystem exchange of various control systems, insufficient time delays for the formation of different indications and settings, and incorrect
operation of the video frames. Using a mathematical model, it was possible to reveal errors in the design algorithms and for- mulate suggestions for improving the algorithms.
The coolant flow and the mixing of coolant flows with different temperatures in the upper chamber of BN-800 were analyzed on the basis of the supercomputer twin. The installation’s nominal operating regime, which is characterized by max- imum spread of the coolant temperature and makes the largest contribution to the structural damage, was considered within the context of the study (Fig. 6). A computational analysis showed that the coolant temperature in the upper chamber of the reactor is non-uniform (the spread can reach 30°C). This leads to the formation of vortices and temperature pulsations, which can influence the temperature state of the structural elements of the reactor and equipment. Based on the results of numerical simulation, recommendations were developed for improving the design of the reactor so as to create a more uniform tempera- ture distribution in the mixing chamber.
Conclusion. The developed supercomputer twin of a nuclear energy installation made it possible to improve the quality and safety of newly developed designs, curtail expensive testing and optimize technological processes as well as to reduce the time and cost of designing new installations.
Currently, OKBM Afrikantov has created supercomputer twins for the nuclear energy installation RITM-200 and the projects Yasen-M and BN-800. The results of bringing in digital twins have shown that this technology holds promise from the standpoint of computational substantiation of designs. The achieved results showed that digital twins make it possible to reduce excessive conservativeness inherent in designs, introduce promising new operating regimes of installations, justify extension of the assigned life of equipment, and reduce commissioning times of the control systems. Implementing this tech- nology in the early stages of design will reduce the commissioning times of nuclear energy installations.
