<title>Cooperation in education and training in nuclear- and radiochemistry in Europe</title>
<Affiliation>1.Department of Nuclear Chemistry, Czech Technical University in Prague, Brehova 7, 115 19 Prague , Czech Republic；2.Laboratory of Radiochemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 55, A.I. Virtasen aukio 1, 00014 Helsinki, Finland ；3.Department of Chemistry, University of Oslo, Blindern,
P.O. Box 1033, 0315 Oslo, Norway</Affiliation>
<author>Jan John • Jukka Lehto • Teija Koivula •
Jon Petter Omtvedt</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1007/s10967-014-3624-x</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s10967-014-3624-x</URL>
Abstract The motivation, history and status of coordi- nation of education and training in nuclear- and radio- chemistry in Europe are reviewed. The achievements of the Euratom FP7 project ‘‘Cooperation In education in Nuclear CHemistry (CINCH)’’ are described. Attention is paid to the results of the survey of universities teaching nuclear chemistry and their respective curricula evaluation, to the plan to introduce the EuroMaster in nuclear- and radio- chemistry quality label recognized and guaranteed by the European Association for Chemical and Molecular Sci- ences (EuCheMS), and to CINCH NucWik—an interactive database proposed and implemented as an open structure in the form of a ‘‘Wiki’’.
Keywords Nuclear chemistry · Radiochemistry ·
Education · Training · NRC EuroMaster
Introduction
Any of the potential options for the nuclear power—both the renaissance, if any, or the phase out—will require significant numbers of the respective specialists, amongst others the nuclear and/or radiochemists. In parallel, a sig- nificant demand exists for these specialists in non-energy fields, such as environmental protection, radiopharmacy, nuclear medicine, industrial use of nuclear methods, biol- ogy, authorities, etc. Already in 2000 the OECD’s Nuclear Energy Agency (OECD/NEA) report ‘‘Nuclear Education and Training: Cause for Concern?’’ [1] demonstrated that many nations are training too few scientists to meet these needs. Subsequent studies have confirmed the OECD/NEA findings. Actually, in Europe many countries lack sufficient staff and equipment to provide education across a broad field of nuclear topics. Of particular concern are skill deficits within nuclear chemistry at Masters and doctorate levels: an area of strategic importance for the maintenance of current European nuclear operations and future energy options within the evolving EU economy. Such skills are also important for meeting the challenges presented by ‘‘beyond design basis’’ nuclear accidents caused by human failures, natural disasters, terrorist or sabotage activities where not only the technical handling of the situation is critical, but also making sure that information and recom- mendations to the public are correct and relevant.
In order to mitigate the effects of the declining number of qualified staff in nuclear chemistry, from 2010 to 2013 the CINCH-I project—Cooperation in Education in Nuclear- and Radiochemistry in Europe—sought to coor- dinate education in nuclear chemistry. Its follow-up, the CINCH-II—Cooperation in Education and Training in Nuclear- and Radiochemistry in Europe—project, is a direct continuation of CINCH-I and aims to apply the critical mass required to implement the new courses and teaching tools that will at least narrow the gap between what is needed and the current situation with respect to the nuclear chemistry postgraduate education and training needs of the European Union (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1 Project logo
Aims, outcome and achievements of the CINCH-I project
The CINCH-I project aimed at the coordination of the rather diverse situation in nuclear chemistry education and training in Europe. The project also aimed at providing a common basis to the fragmented activities in this field and thus moving the education and training in nuclear chem- istry to a higher level. The main target groups were not only the doctoral students and research workers but also students at the Master level. By introducing Master stu- dents and even bachelor students to the field of nuclear chemistry this early in their studies it should increase the awareness and attractiveness of choosing a carrier within nuclear and radiochemistry and thus enlarge the source of highly qualified professionals for the future employers.
The CINCH consortium included both academia and ‘future employers’, thus representing all the key players in the field. A big benefit was the participation of a Russian partner (Moscow State University) in the project that added the considerable Russian expertise in this field. The expe- rience gained by former EU 6th FP projects like EURAC, ENEN II, ENETRAP etc. and ENEN association during the coordination of nuclear engineering education was directly applied.
The main results of the project with the broadest impact to students, teachers, industries, and research community are a set of compact joint modular courses developed in different branches of modern nuclear chemistry, an elec- tronic tool in the form of a virtual educational platform developed and demonstrated for both education and train- ing, and a long term sustainable strategy for the nuclear
chemistry	education—including	a	roadmap	for	its
implementation. Main results
University curricula evaluation
The objective was to collect information on nuclear and radiochemistry education in the European universities, and then to evaluate and compare the curricula of these uni- versities. This work formed the basis for all following undertakings in the education field. Not only EU countries
were involved but the whole of Europe, including Russia, was covered. The universities were categorized into vari- ous groups depending on whether they give courses at bachelor, Master or graduate levels. Another classification was based on the general area on which the university focused its education (general nuclear and radiochemistry, nuclear technology, radioecology, radiopharmaceutical chemistry etc.). The main findings are summarised in the next section below.
This education survey was complemented with two databases. One of them is the database of existing practical exercises in nuclear and radiochemistry. A detailed data- base of the laboratory exercises available and/or in use at the universities in Europe has been compiled. All the providers of practical laboratory courses have been invited to contribute detailed descriptions of work for the respec- tive exercises into a common database. This database will thus become a basic source of information for implemen- tation of new or update of existing practical laboratory courses. As a main exploit, it may also serve as the basic resource for drafting a future textbook of practical labo- ratory exercises in nuclear chemistry.
Similarly, a comprehensive list of textbooks, university textbooks and other teaching aids that adequately cover all the topics within nuclear chemistry at different levels has been compiled. This survey was not limited to the Euro- pean textbooks but it covers all the textbooks that have been published in English or any European languages. The titles have been grouped based on their scope—e.g. general textbooks, nuclear fuel cycle chemistry textbooks, radio- analytical textbooks, etc. Suitable textbooks have been recommended for the identified routes and levels of nuclear chemical education. One of the exploits of this evaluation is the identification of the potential gaps in the coverage of the field by available textbooks and suggestion of the correction measures. The most important example of this effort is the identified lack of comprehensive textbook of practical laboratory exercises in nuclear chemistry.
University curricula development
The objective was to define a set of curricula leading to different levels of radiochemical education that would be applicable at any university. To achieve this objective, the most important target specializations of nuclear and radiochemistry education, such as actinide chemistry, nuclear fuel cycle chemistry, radioecology, radiopharma- ceutical chemistry etc., were identified. Optimum routes leading to various levels (PhD, Master) of qualification in these fields were defined. The curricula were proposed for each of the various routes and levels of education identified in the form of ‘‘Minimum requirements’’ for the extent (number of ECTS credits [2]) and contents of the nuclear chemistry courses proposed. The plan deals with essential knowledge (courses/modules/exercises) required at various levels. Entry points for trainees with different background and education levels were defined.
The main result was a set of curricula leading to dif- ferent levels of nuclear chemical education. The curricula developed for the Master level of education became a basis for the future ‘‘European Master in Nuclear and Radio- chemistry’’. This ‘‘label’’ should guarantee a uniform level of the university graduates bearing the title of MSc in nuclear and radiochemistry or MSc in chemistry special- ized in nuclear and radiochemistry. The main principles of this system are summarised in the respective chapter below.
Identification and evaluation of the training needs
The current nuclear industry is facing a challenge in finding and training a whole new generation of employees. As a contribution to coping with this challenge, identification and evaluation of current training needs was performed. Information on the nuclear industry (as the largest employee of the graduates) and the potential developments in the next five to ten years together with their current training aids were collected. In addition, an attempt was done to compile, review and evaluate a list of training aids used by the industries in the field of nuclear chemistry and radiochemistry.
Based on this survey, elements of optimum curricula for different target groups and different levels of radiochemi- cal training were proposed. A plan was made for a basic nuclear and radiochemistry training programme that pro- vides professionals educated in non-nuclear disciplines of chemistry with the necessary skills needed for enrolling the topical modular courses developed.
Joint courses and strategies development
The primary objective was to develop several ‘‘sample’’ compact modular courses and design a system for student and teachers exchange (including internships). This was realized by selecting several courses from the university curricula and training courses which then were transformed into compact (1–2 weeks) modular courses. The developed courses combine lectures and practical laboratory exer- cises, as ‘‘hands-on’’ training is essential. Two types of such courses were identified, and three sample courses were developed and demonstrated; each of them for about ten international students:
(1)General purpose education/training courses in dif- ferent branches of modern nuclear chemistry for the students and/or trainees with sufficient nuclear
chemical background. Demonstration courses were ‘‘Chemistry of nuclear fuel cycle’’(hosted by ENSCP Paris) and ‘‘Radioecology’’ (hosted by UMB Aas, NO).
(2)Dedicated training course designed namely for delivering the basics of nuclear chemistry to non- nuclear chemists, including the ‘‘senior’’ ones—e.g. employees of the end users requiring requalification. Demonstration course was ‘‘Hands-on training in nuclear chemistry’’ (hosted by CTU Prague).
In addition, curricula of a series of additional courses were proposed and developed. They are usually based on courses existing at CINCH partners and they can be easily brought up to the demonstration level as joint modular courses.
The secondary objective was to develop a long term strategy for the nuclear chemistry education. This task included two studies:
•Examination and comparison of alternative routes leading to a European Master in nuclear chemistry.
•Evaluation of the options for a sustainable system for students and teachers exchange (including internships).
Two alternative routes to EuroMaster were examined— the ‘‘ECTNA route’’ and the ‘‘ENEN route’’. The ECTNA route was selected as the preferred route, however, it was concluded that, if required, the networking associated with the NRC EuroMaster quality label awarded by ECTN Association could be developed in partnership with ENEN. As ENEN activities are not much oriented towards nuclear- and radiochemistry, the NRC EuroMaster project is not in competition which should favour a fruitful collaboration.
Among the various identified sources of financing, the programme ‘‘Erasmus for All’’ seems to be of high interest. In particular, the possibility of creation of ‘‘knowledge alliances’’ and ‘‘sector skills alliances’’ is highly attractive and could be a relevant way to strengthen the partnerships between higher education institutions and industrial end- users. In the same spirit, the creation of ‘‘chairs’’ supported by industrial end-users should be cautiously considered with a reasonable probability of success considering both the needs of recruitments and the quality of the consortium of universities involved in the NRC EuroMaster project. For the end-users, the contribution to such a chair would allow them to exchange with all the universities partici- pating to the consortium. Also, it would allow them to easily identify and detect candidates throughout Europe. Other potential sources of financing include creation of continuing programmes based on modules available in the NRC EuroMaster, enrolment of non-EU students for which the tuition fees can be high and of course a myriad of bilateral or national programmes.
An interactive database of teaching material and the CINCH e-learning platform
The aim of this work package was to develop and launch an e-learning platform for providing distance-learning courses in nuclear chemistry. Such e-learning tools, when built up in a sensible way (based on appropriate learning method- ology), may be useful and effective addition to traditional teaching. The main tasks in this regard were:
(a)Identification of the topics that would be deliverable on-line.
(b)Development of a database for sharing and distribu- tion of e-learning tools and materials.
As the interactive database an open structure was pro- posed and implemented as a ‘‘Wiki’’ using the wiki-server of the University of Oslo. The best example of a wiki is Wikipedia (www.wikipedia.com) which is well known to most people. We wanted to create a database—imple- mented as a wiki system—of nuclear and radiochemistry teaching material to help teachers find and preferably also share their own teaching their material. In this way ‘‘rec- reating the wheel’’ should be avoided. Furthermore, by developing new teaching material as a collaborative effort should heighten the quality of the material developed. Our trial-server was named NukWik (http://wiki.uio.no/mn/ safe/nukwik). Later on, as part of the follow up CINCH-II project, NukWik was moved to a commercial and thus more accessible server called NucWik (http://www.wikis paces.com/Nucwik). The main principles and functions of NukWik/NucWik are described in the respective chapter below.
An important part of this work was to identify an optimum sustainable e-learning management platform. As a starting point the platforms already implemented at CINCH Partners Universities were evaluated with respect to suitability for our task. Based on the results of detailed discussions of various options available, the user-friendly e-learning platform Moodle was selected and imple- mented; it is accessible from the CINCH web page. The platform aims at Master/PhD students and other trainees.  It is available for e-learning modules or whole joint courses in nuclear- and radiochemistry. It should allow teachers and students to get information needed in the respective course in fast, interactive and sufficient form. This distance education platform should facilitate the access of the educators as well as the students to nuclear- and radiochemistry courses without unnecessary mobility of personnel. These are key properties needed when running international courses. A sample original e-learn- ing course entitled ‘‘Chemistry of the circuits of the nuclear power plants’’, presenting the state-of-the-art  of the chemistry used in nuclear power plants, along with the
prospective works under study to improve the efficiency and the life time of current and future nuclear power  plants, was developed and implemented on this platform by ENSCP Paris. The responses obtained in the test run were positive.
Examples of CINCH achievements
Survey of universities teaching nuclear chemistry and their respective curricula evaluation
Surveying universities and various educational pro- grammes in nuclear and radiochemistry (NRC) was started already early in the CINCH-project and continued during the years 2010–2011, mainly by internet survey and sending a questionnaire to the NRC departments through- out Europe. Results were published in a report ‘‘Nuclear and radiochemistry curricula in the European universities’’ (http://www.cinch-project.eu/).
The survey covered education at BSc, MSc and PhD level and the results showed that the educational pro- grammes in NRC are very diverse. A significant part of the nuclear related education in Europe, i.e. nuclear engineer- ing and technology programmes, is tailored to the needs of nuclear power industry and has less nuclear and radio- chemistry involved. On the other hand, a number of uni- versities/institutions have high level of nuclear and radiochemistry research and offer possibility to do PhD- work in NRC related fields but have only limited education at lower level(s). Furthermore, collaboration between uni- versities and industry/research units brings education and training closer to each other, which affects development of the academic programmes and also complicates compari- son of them.
Eventually 69 universities in 22 countries were included in the first CINCH survey. Majority of these universities (57 %) has NRC education as individual courses under various educational programmes such as chemistry, phys- ics, biochemistry and environmental sciences. Only a limited number of universities (7 %) offer a complete programme, i.e. BSc or MSc degree in NRC. However, specialization in NRC (a major subject or a course module plus a possibility to do a diploma work) under other pro- grammes, such as MSc in Chemistry or Chemical/Envi- ronmental engineering, is possible in several other universities (36 %). In general, curriculum in NRC reflects research interests of the department. Majority of the spe- cializations are in general NRC, large specified topics are environmental radiochemistry/radioecology and radio- pharmaceutical chemistry. Research training and diploma work have a strong role in specialization. However, the extent of specialization varies significantly in different educational systems. Some countries/universities are only
Fig. 2 Major topics of NRC courses taught under various educational programmes at BSc and MSc level. Presented as percentage of the total amount of credit units on their way to accreditation of the Bologna system. MSc programme may also be aimed at students with certain lower level degree in NRC. Altogether 44 NRC pro- grammes (degree or specialization) in 30 different univer- sities were described in the report. Average number of students graduating annually from these programmes is typically five or even less. Major topics of the NRC courses under various programmes are presented in Fig. 2.
The survey is now continued under the CINCH-II project. Universities/departments already included in the first report are therefore asked (via their contact persons) to update relevant information on their unit, especially concerning changes in the curricula and focus of education in NRC. Other interested units can join the survey by sending free- form e-mail or by answering short questions in a question- naire on the CINCH project web-page.
EuroMaster in nuclear and radiochemistry
As introduced above, the CINCH-I project started planning the EuroMaster degree in nuclear and radiochemistry (NRC EuroMaster). The educational content of the com- mon NRC EuroMaster degree was proposed to be based on the minimum requirements developed also in the CINCH-I project (see http://cinch-project.eu/). According to this plan a Master’s program eligible to NRC EuroMaster label should have a workload of at least 60 ECTS credit units (50 % in case of 120 cu Master degrees) on nuclear and radiochemistry. Of this 60 credit units at least 10 credit units should be exercises and at least 30 credit units should comprise of Master’s thesis and project work (diploma work). The educational program should cover most rele- vant aspects from the following five topic areas:
•Principles of nuclear physics.
•Radiation safety.
•Detection and measurement of radiation.
•
Chemistry and analysis of radionuclides.
•Nuclear reactions and production of radionuclides.
Details of each topic areas and of the required exercises can be found at http://cinch-project.eu/.
The CINCH-II project is now implementing this NRC EuroMaster degree. The next steps are establishing a network of partner universities and application of the label for the degree. So far, at least seven European universities are involved in establishing the network for the NRC EuroMaster degree which should be officially established in 2015. The network is open for all European universities and those uni- versities not participating in the beginning can join the con- sortium at a later phase. The functions of the network will be:
•Education of NRC Masters based on the agreed  common curriculum (minimum requirements).
•Promote student exchange between partner universities.
•Organize common summer schools.
•Promote and plan NRC education in Europe.
It is not the intention of the network to establish joint Master degree officially recognized in all partner univer- sities. Such joint degree agreements can, however, be signed between two or more partner universities. A major purpose of the NRC EuroMaster network is to promote student exchange between partner universities. To facilitate the exchange all partner universities will sign bilateral ERASMUS agreements.
The label for the NRC EuroMaster degree will be received from EuCheMS (European Association for Chemical and Molecular Sciences) Division of Nuclear and Radiochemistry (DNRC). The division will evaluate cur- ricula of the candidate universities. If the curricula fulfil the requirements set in the minimum requirements document produced by CINCH project the candidate university will receive the right to grant the NRC EuroMaster Degree label to their students.
As explained above, an interactive database was proposed and implemented as an open structure in the form of a ‘‘Wiki’’ in the CINCH-I project. As mentioned, the test wiki was moved to a commercial server and is now freely available under the name NucWik (http://www.wikispaces.com/Nucwik). The main idea behind NucWik is to encourage active participation in devel- oping and updating the teaching material for nuclear and radiochemistry. The CINCH project has uploaded a selection of material to enable demonstration of the wiki’s potential and intended use, but it will only be successful if many teachers actively update and comment on its material, in addition to uploading new material. If enough teachers can be encouraged to actively use NucWik, it has the potential to provide teachers anywhere access to high quality teaching material, teaching aids and other teachers experiences in teaching nuclear and radiochemistry. It is important to understand that such a data- base—a wiki—is a dynamic construction, where the users not only download material but also contribute by uploading their own material. In this way everybody will benefit in the long run by having a large selection of material and aids. In theory, such a wiki-database can be developed to provide a complete set of course material, including course book(s), exercises and labo- ratory instructions. The CINCH project, however, only pro- vided the platform and illustrated how the platform can be utilized. It is up to the end users to decide to what extent they want to base their courses and teaching on the Wiki, and how it should be structured.
Unlike e.g. Wikipedia, NucWik has implemented a peer review system to ensure that selected material meets a minimum standard. This will be done by reviewing e.g. the material uploaded to perform a given laboratory exercise. The review will be performed by one of a selected group of teachers (not having been involved in the creation of the material) and—if approved—the material will be given the label ‘‘CINCH approved’’. Material thus labelled will therefore meet a minimum standard and quality and should provide reasonable confidence in the provided material. Furthermore, teachers must register to be allowed to upload material, thus no anonymous material can be put on Nu- cWik. The only exception to this is that even unregistered users can comment on any page that already was created. This is particularly useful for pointing out errors or pro- viding feedback to a given page. Downloading is free for everybody and the material is completely ‘‘open source’’— there is no restrictions on downloading material.
CINCH-II project
The CINCH-II—Cooperation in Education and Training in Nuclear- and Radiochemistry in Europe—project is
Fig. 3 CINCH-II Pert diagram
scheduled for 2013–2016. The project is built around three pillars (Education, Vocational Education and Training (VET), and Distance Learning) supported by cross-cutting activities on vision, sustainability and nuclear awareness that includes also dissemination and management activi- ties. The Pert diagram of the project is shown in Fig. 3. The project will further develop and implement the plan for the European Master’s degree in nuclear chemistry (NRC EuroMaster) and complete a pan-European offer of mod- ular training courses including addressing accreditation issues. It will develop a training passport in nuclear chemistry and prepare the ground for the European credit system for vocational education and training (ECVET) application in nuclear chemistry.
CINCH-II will implement modern e-learning tools developed in CINCH-I and elsewhere. Furthermore, new tools for distance learning will be developed. It will lay the foundations of a nuclear chemistry education and training platform as a future sustainable Euratom Fission Training Scheme (EFTS) in nuclear and radiochemistry based on the already established CINCH consortium and its associated partners. Furthermore, CINCH-II will develop a sustain- able system for mobility to ensure an efficient mobility programme for trainers and trainees within the nuclear chemistry network. Finally, it will develop methods of raising awareness of the possible options for nuclear chemistry with potential students, academia and industry.
Experience counts
The project will make full use of the knowledge and experience gathered and tools developed and demonstrated in the CINCH-I project. In the consortium, representatives from both educational suppliers (academia) and end-users (future employers) gathered to enable the design of a syl- labus that responds not only to the current but also to the future nuclear chemical education and training needs, such as pyrochemistry for future nuclear fuel cycles. The part- ners in the CINCH-II project are:
•Czech Technical University in Prague (coordinator).
•Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, SE.
•Helsingin Yliopisto, Helsinki, FI.
•National Nuclear Laboratory Limited, UK.
•Gottfried Wilhelm Leibnitz Universitaet Hannover, DE.
•Loughborough University, UK.
•Evalion s.r.o., Prague, CZ.
•Commissariat a l’energie atomique et aux energies alternatives, Marcoule, FR.
•University of Leeds, UK.
•Universitetet for Miljo og Biovitenskap, Aas, NO.
•Universitetet i Oslo, NO.
Achieving the project aims will require assembling, comparing and evaluating approaches to, principles of, and experience with the existing education and training across EU countries. Stress will be put on practical education that can provide, for example, a database of practical exercises in nuclear chemistry or simulations and RoboLab (a remote controlled laboratory experienced with video feedback) and hands-on components in all relevant courses developed. New common study materials in areas identified during CINCH-I will be developed and new or adapted courses for electronic educational platforms will be produced and made accessible for teachers and institutions either for free (through Nu- cWik—as described earlier) or based on individual agree- ments (CINCH Moodle e-learning platform).
Training delivery
The foundations of a permanent nuclear chemistry educa- tion and training platform as a future sustainable EFTS in nuclear chemistry will be laid out. The EFTS will provide a platform where the courses developed within the training packages embedded in on-going or recent EURATOM ‘‘chemistry’’ projects, including ACTINET, ACSEPT, TALISMAN, SACSESS, SKIN, ASGARD and FAIRFU-
ELS will remain available to all.
The implementation and development of modern e-learning tools will offer a unique distance learning opportunity to students as well as younger and experienced research workers from the nuclear chemical community. The e-learning tools to be developed include: NucWik—an open platform for sharing teaching material; e-learning modules on the sustainable CINCH Moodle e-learning platform; problem solving sets for ‘‘Computers in Educa- tion’’; ‘‘RoboLab’’ remote controlled exercises; and simu- lation exercises.
In addition to the transfer of high-level competences, this will enable increased cohesion and international
cooperation both within the nuclear chemical community and with other players in the nuclear energy field. It will help nuclear sector professionals to access vocational education and training and remain competitive within the labour market. A tool will be created which is accessible to all European parties helping to bridge universities, research centres and nuclear industries with small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and contributing to future cooperation between these parties.
Strategic importance and wider community
The CINCH-II consortium will create a basis for public– private partnerships that can grow over many years and maximise the transfer of higher level knowledge and technology to both younger students and experienced research workers. The opportunity to meet with colleagues from across Europe at joint modular courses delivered by the leading experts in the field can increase the attrac- tiveness of research careers in nuclear chemistry across the EU.
The project outcomes will be of generic value and can be exploited by other organizations. Therefore, the project partners will look to disseminate its ideas and results to the wider community beyond nuclear chemistry. The project’s key events including lectures, training, courses, open seminars, summer schools and international conferences organized are publicised through the project website (http:www.cinch-project.eu) in order to share the knowl- edge gathered during the project.
Conclusions
Significant progress has been achieved in the field of the coordination of the education and training in nuclear- and radiochemistry in Europe within the sequence of two fol- low-up EURATOM supported projects CINCH and CINCH-II. Their results are of strategic importance for the maintenance of European nuclear operations and future EU energy options. They are also important for meeting the challenges presented by unpredicted nuclear events where handling the technical situation is of the same key impor- tance as making sure that information and recommenda- tions to the public are correct and relevant. This is of special importance when realizing that the demand for skills in nuclear chemistry will increase even should Eur- ope decide not to further develop its nuclear energy capacity due to the requirements for decommissioning existing nuclear installations.
The results of the project are expected to have a broad impact to students, teachers, industries, and research community. This regards particularly the compact joint modular courses in different branches of modern nuclear chemistry, the electronic tool in the form of a virtual educational platform—CINCH Moodle—available for both education and training (both conceived as applicable at the PhD, life-long learning, and MSc levels), and a long term sustainable strategy for the nuclear chemistry education including a roadmap for its implementation. Moreover, the nuclear wiki ‘‘NucWik’’ has been developed as a source of teaching material, information and a tool for teachers and students worldwide.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by two sub-  sequent FP7 Euratom projects—CINCH (FP7-CA-249690) and CINCH-II (project number 605173).
