<title>New Microscope and Ion Accelerators for Materials Investigations (MIAMI-2) system at the University of Huddersfield</title>
<Affiliation>University of Huddersfield, Queensgate, Huddersfield, HD1 3DH, United Kingdom</Affiliation>
<author>G. Greaves ∗, A.H. Mir, R.W. Harrison, M.A. Tunes, S.E. Donnelly, J.A. Hinks</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier BV</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2019.03.074</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2019.03.074</URL>
ABSTRACT
Radiation damage is a complex dynamic process with multiple atomic mechanisms interacting and competing      to determine the end state of the material. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with in-situ ion irradiation allows direct observation of the microstructural evolution of a sample from the virgin to end state. A new TEM  with in-situ ion irradiation has been established at the University of Huddersfield: the Microscope and Ion Accelerators for Materials Investigations (MIAMI-2) system. MIAMI-2 combines a 300 kV TEM with medium- energy 350 kV and low-energy 20 kV ion beamlines. Whilst the medium-energy beamline can be used for most species up to Au, the low-energy beamline is primarily designed for implanting light-ion species such as H and   He. These can be used individually or mixed prior to entering the TEM allowing dual-ion-beam irradiation experiments to, for example, simulate the combined effects of displacement damage and  the introduction of        He from (n, 𝛼) nuclear reactions. The TEM can operate from 60–300 kV and is equipped with a 16 megapixel digital camera, an energy-filtered imaging system and an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer for elemental     and chemical analysis. Sample temperature can be varied from –170 ◦C to 1300 ◦C and a gas injection system enables gaseous environments at pressures of up to 10−2 mbar at the  sample  position.  The  new  MIAMI-2  system is a powerful tool for the investigation of radiation damage in a wide range  of  materials  which  are exposed to irradiating environments either during processing and/or whilst in-service in areas including nuclear applications, nanotechnology, semiconductor processing and extraterrestrial environments.
Keywords:
In-situ ion irradiation Transmission electron microscopy Radiation damage
1.Introduction
This type of system  can  be  utilised  to  investigate  a  wide  range of materials challenges that exist across a number of scientific and technological fields. For example, in nuclear applications, materials  are required to withstand the combined effects of high temperatures, atomic displacements induced by energetic neutrons and the accu- mulation of inert gases from nuclear reactions [1]. Ion  beams  are  used to engineer nanostructures and nanotechnologies may need to survive deployment in irradiating environments [2]. The microelec- tronics industry has long used ion implantation as a method to modify the properties of semiconductors and this can induce deleterious, as well as beneficial, effects [3,4]. Finally, technologies are required  which can withstand exposure  to  space  [5]  and  the  understanding  of irradiation-induced changes in materials originating from extrater- restrial environments can help to piece together the history of the cosmos [6].
Radiation damage is a complex dynamic process in which multiple mechanisms interact and compete on the atomic scale to determine the end state of the material under irradiation [7]. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with in-situ ion irradiation allows a nanoscale region of material to be characterised before, during and after irradiation [8, 9]. Compared to ex-situ  techniques:  it  is  a  highly  efficient  manner in which to collect experimental data; it allows conditions such as sample temperature to be controlled and maintained throughout both irradiation and observation; is less prone to contamination or damage as samples do not need transferring between pieces of equipment; and it enables direct observation of the evolution of the microstructure as   it evolves under irradiation [8,9]. Furthermore, in the case of nuclear materials it avoids the issues of time, cost and induced radioactivity inherent to neutron irradiation within a reactor.
The history of TEM with in-situ ion irradiation [8] began in 1961 with the observation of black-spot damage in Au samples by Pash-     ley and Presland [10] working at the Tube Investment Laboratories, Cambridge, United Kingdom. This was found to have been caused by negative ions emitted from the tungsten filament of the electron gun. The first TEM to be interfaced with an ion accelerator followed soon after at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell, United Kingdom [11]. Since then, such systems have  been  established  in  USA [12–19], Japan [17–24], France [25–27] and China [28]. Further- more, there are a small number of TEMs with in-situ focussed ion beam
milling capabilities including in Japan [29] and Luxembourg [30]. The interested reader is directed to review papers on the TEM with in-situ ion irradiation technique [16,20–24,31,32].
The first Microscope and Ion Accelerator for Materials Investigations (MIAMI-1) system [33] was originally constructed at the University of Salford between 2007–2010 and moved to the University of Hudders- field in 2011. It consists of a 200 kV JEOL JEM-2000FX TEM coupled to a 100 kV ion accelerator and continues to be used to perform TEM with in-situ ion irradiation experiments. However, MIAMI-1 has some limitations; foremost being the energy range, meaning that often a trade-off has to be sought between displacements per ion and implanta- tion rate; the MIAMI-1 system also struggled in producing high currents of ions from non-gaseous sources; finally, the TEM was chosen for ease of integration with an ion-accelerator and has a reduced resolution compared with a contemporary microscope. The new MIAMI-2 system improves upon MIAMI-1 in all these areas as well as adding in-situ sample environments and analytical techniques. Both MIAMI systems are referred to collectively as the MIAMI facility and are located in new purpose-built laboratories at the University of Huddersfield, United Kingdom.
2.MIAMI-2 system layout
The MIAMI-2 system has been installed across two storeys in purpose-built laboratories. The overall layout is shown in Fig. 1 and     is primarily composed of: a 300 kV Hitachi H-9500 TEM; a medium- energy beamline based on a 350 kV National Electrostatics Corporation ion accelerator incorporating a Danfysik 921A ion source; and a low- energy beamline based on a 20 kV Colutron G-2 ion gun. On the ground floor of the laboratory are located the TEM and low-energy beamline as well as the control systems for the TEM, ion beamlines and auxiliary equipment; an additional vestibule houses the TEM service equipment including vacuum backing pumps, water cooling system and TEM power supplies in order to provide mechanical and acoustic isolation from the microscope. The storey above is divided into two: a safety-interlocked room for the 350 kV accelerator and a beamline hall in which the medium-energy ion beam can be either diverted to a target station (currently being designed) or deflected downwards to the TEM.
In between the two storeys a 1.5×2.5 m aperture allows the medium-
energy ion beamline and the support structure for the low-energy ion
beam line to descend and through which equipment can be transferred.
3.Transmission electron microscope
MIAMI-2 has at its focus a Hitachi H-9500 TEM which can operate from 60–300 kV. The original column of the TEM has been modified to include an additional section between the condenser and objective lenses as indicated in Fig. 2a. This increases the height of the instru- ment by 305 mm and allows the ion beam to enter the microscope via  a vacuum port which gives direct line-of-sight to the sample position  at an angle of 18.7◦  to the electron beam and at 90◦  to the 𝑥-axis of   the TEM as shown in Fig. 2b.
A small angle between the electron  and  ion  beams  is  desirable for several reasons: it reduces the chances of the sample being in- advertently shadowed from the ion beam; similarly, it increases the range of crystallographic orientations which can be reached without causing shadowing; the range of the ions is increased in the direction of the electron beam reducing the need to tilt towards the ion beam to maximise range; and ion beam sputtering is minimised in planar sample geometries at angles closer to normal incidence; also the closer the ion beam trajectory to the electron optic axis the less the ions are deflected by the powerful magnetic field of the objective lens, which while not an issue for high-energy heavy-ions leads to difficulties when for example implanting light ions at low energies.
Other modifications to the standard configuration of the H-9500 include a pneumatic ion beam shutter which can be inserted into the path of the ions before they enter a custom-drilled hole in the tantalum insert at the top of the objective section.
Fig. 1. Overview of the layout of the MIAMI-2 system,  which  incorporates  two  ion  beams which can be combined before entering the microscope.
3.1.TEM imaging
The MIAMI-2 system has been fitted with a Gatan Model 1095 OneView 16 megapixel  (4096×4096  pixels)  digital  camera  capable  of 25 frames per second  (fps)  at  full  resolution  and  up  to  300  fps at 512×512 pixels. This opens up new opportunities to capture dy- namic phenomena such as dislocation loop shuttling [34], damage-zone
annealing [35] and bubble evolution [36] at much higher temporal resolutions than previously possible. Furthermore, this can be captured as a compressed digital video file and/or as individual video frames containing the raw unprocessed data from the OneView camera.
3.2.Analytical capabilities
Both energy-filtered TEM (EFTEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) are available in MIAMI-2 for in-situ characterisation of samples before, during and after irradiation. These complimentary analytical techniques offer the ability to explore the overall composi- tion and the distribution of the elements within a sample. Furthermore, EFTEM allows the exploration of bonding and electronic energy levels. For example, these analytical capabilities enable in-situ study of pre- cipitation [37], radiation-induced segregation to grain boundaries [38] and bond rearrangement such as sp3 to sp2 conversion in carbon-based materials [39].
The EFTEM capability is provided by a Gatan Model 963 GIF (Gatan Imaging Filter) Quantum SE which offers a resolution of 1.5 eV at zero loss with a maximum range of 2048 eV across 2048 channels. A Bruker Quantax 400 with XFlash 6T 60 provides EDS with a 126 eV 60 mm2 detector allowing identification of elements from Be to Am.
3.3.Available in-situ sample environments
A wide range of sample temperatures can be accessed using various samples holders. For low-temperature irradiations, a Gatan Model 636 double-tilt liquid-nitrogen cooling holder allows access to temperatures from –170 to 100 ◦C for  experiments  which  require,  for  example,  the suppression of annealing to allow amorphisation mechanisms to  be studied or reduced diffusion to explore the accumulation of gases
Fig.  2.  The Hitachi H-9500 300 kV TEM installed in the MIAMI-2 system: (a) photograph with the additional column section to accommodate the introduction of the ion beams   indicated by the dashed lines; and (b) schematic illustrating the geometric relationship between the ion and electron beams, the axes of the TEM and the tilt axes of the goniometer         and sample holder.
Fig. 3. Layout of the two ion beamlines of the MIAMI-2 system showing the Danfysik 921A ion  gun  on  the  medium-energy  beamline  and  the  Colutron  G-2  ion  gun  on  the  low-energy beamline which are then combined in the ion beam mixing magnet before entering the Hitachi H-9500 TEM at 18.7◦ to the electron beam axis.
Fig.  4.   The medium-energy beamline in the MIAMI-2 system. A switching magnet allows the ion beam to be diverted ±15◦  for future use in target stations other than the TEM.                The ion beam is bent through 71.3◦ by an electrostatic analyser and then descends through the aperture in the floor towards the TEM below.
Fig.  5.  The low-energy beamline in the MIAMI-2 system incorporating a Colutron G-2  20 kV ion gun (left), Einzel lens (middle) and beam profile monitor (right).
which might otherwise escape the sample [36]. Higher temperatures up to 1000 ◦C can be reached with a Gatan Model 652 double-tilt heating holder or up to 1300 ◦C in a Gatan Model 628 single-tilt heating holder allowing access to technologically-relevant temperatures such as for annealing during semiconductor processing [40] or inside the core of a nuclear fission reactor [1]. Rapid temperature  ramps allow temperatures of up to 800 ◦C to be achieved in less than  a  second using a Hitachi microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) holder for experiments requiring near-instantaneous heating accompanied by minimal sample drift. In addition, a Gatan Model 654 straining holder allows samples to be put under tensile stress at room temperature. These capabilities are in addition to conventional room-temperature single-tilt, double-tilt and tilt-rotate sample holders.
Any of the sample holders can be used with the in-situ gas flow capability which allows as many as four gases to be combined in de- fined concentrations (down to 1%) and fed into the objective section of the TEM to pressures of 10−2 mbar at the sample position. Differential pumping in the TEM allows the rest of the column to remain at high vacuum. Within the large number of possible combinations of sample, holder and gas there are inevitably limitations such as the use of high temperatures in oxidising environments, which limits the holder choice to just the MEMS holder. However, this novel addition to a TEM with in-situ ion irradiation system opens up new experimental possibilities.
4.Ion beam systems
The MIAMI-2 system features two ion beamlines designed and man- ufactured by National Electrostatic Corporation. These can be mixed prior to entering the TEM for in-situ dual ion beam irradiation. The overall layout of the ion beamlines is shown in Fig. 3 and described below. Both beamlines are controlled by a central computer system (shown in Fig. 1) which is co-located alongside the TEM to allow efficient and co-ordinated operation of both the microscope and ion beams.
4.1.Medium-energy beamline
Located on the storey above the TEM as shown in Fig. 1, a Danfysik 921A ion gun provides high currents of most elements using either a gas, oven, or sputter source. Ions are initially extracted at up to 30 keV, focused using an einzel lens and then mass-selected by a 15◦ magnet. Following the magnet there is an adjustable slit that can be narrowed to improve mass resolution at the expense of current throughput. The beam can then be accelerated by a potential of up to  320  kV;  the beam characteristics can be monitored using beam profile monitors and Faraday cups at multiple positions along the beamline. After accelera- tion, an electrostatic quadrupole lens provides focusing and a switching
Fig. 6. The ion beam mixing magnet in the MIAMI-2 system.
magnet allows the beam to be deflected by 15◦ in the horizontal plane, shown in Fig. 4. In the future this will enable the medium- energy beamline to be used for ex-situ experiments to be performed in a separate environment to that of the TEM. In the normal direction, an electrostatic analyser (ESA) takes the beam through 71.3◦ and onto the axis of the ion beam port of the TEM. Further beam manipulation and monitoring are provided by an electrostatic quadrupole lens, magnetic and electrostatic steerers, a beam profile monitor and Faraday cup before reaching the mixing magnet where the medium- and low-energy beamlines intersect. This beam line provides access to a wide  range
of fluxes, for example, typical maximum ion beam fluxes at sample position are ∼1×1014 ions cm−2 s−1 for 350 keV W. SRIM calculations show that this flux of W ions is sufficient to induce damage in a TEM sample  of  tungsten  of  thickness  100  nm  at  a  rate  of  0.17  dpa s−1.
However, the MIAMI-2 system is also capable of producing fluxes as low as ∼5×109 ions cm−2 s−1 lower fluxes can be achieved but the current dosimetry system is not capable of accurately measuring these low values. This will give on average, one impact per 1000 nm2  every
20 s to allow exploration of single-ion effects. In addition, it is often advantageous to accelerate ions to higher energies – for example, to avoid implantation, an ion of sufficient energy is needed to pass all the way through a TEM lamella while still imparting damage – in order to achieve this different charge states can be used. Using MIAMI-2 double and triple charged beams have been formed, which in the case of this system results in an order of magnitude reduction in flux between each charge state. For example, previous fluxes achieved for 350 keV Kr+
are ∼1×1014  ions cm−2 s−1, 700 keV Kr2+ ∼1×1013  ions cm−2 s−1 and  1 MeV Kr3+ ∼1×1012 ions cm−2 s−1.
Fig. 7. Ion beam dosimetry equipment located within the TEM column in the MIAMI-2 system:  (a)  an  entrance  aperture  (indicated)  followed  by  a  skimming  Faraday  cup  (not visible) before the sample position; and (b) the current metering TEM rod insertable at the sample position.
Fig. 8. EFTEM images of AISI 348 stainless steel irradiated with 30 keV Xe at 800 ◦C to 4.0 dpa (1.1×1016  ions  cm−2 )  in  the  MIAMI-2  system  showing  irradiation-induced  precipitation of the chromium-rich 𝛼’ phase in the austenitic 𝛾 matrix. The scale marker applies to all images in the figure.
4.2.Low-energy beamline
To provide high currents of H and He, a Colutron G-2 ion gun has been installed on a short beamline suspended from above to reduce any vibration, as shown in Figs. 1, 3 and 5. The G-2 operates from a plasma ion source and incorporates an einzel lens, Wein filter and electrostatic deflection. After leaving the Colutron G-2, the ion beam can be focused again using an additional einzel lens and monitored via a beam profile monitor and Faraday cup before reaching the mixing magnet where
the medium- and low-energy beamlines intersect. Typical maximum ion  beam  fluxes  from  this  beamline  at  sample  position  are  2×1014
ions cm−2 s−1 for 6 keV He. This flux is sufficient to implant He into
a TEM sample of tungsten of thickness 100 nm at a  rate  of  ∼300 appm s−1.
4.3.Ion beam mixing
The medium-energy and low-energy ion beams can be mixed into a single ion beam using a magnet (shown in Fig. 6) located at the point where the two beamlines intersect approximately 1.0 m before the sam- ple position in the TEM. Having both beamlines incident on the sample with the same trajectory, reduces the chances of unwanted effects such as the possibility of one beam being channelled or shadowed. As the low-energy beamline is intended for the generation of beams up to a maximum energy and mass of 20 keV He, the strongest field required to deflect such ions on  the 0.305  m arc  of the  flight tube  through  the magnet is 133.6 mT. This is sufficient to cause some deflection to heavier more-energetic ions from the medium-energy beamline such  as 350 keV W; however, given the rigidity of such beams and that
they encounter the magnetic field over only a relatively-short distance, the deflection can be countered through the use of two electrostatic deflectors on the medium-energy beamline prior to the mixing magnet that act in the same direction as the magnets deflection. In the tests performed to date, it has been possible to successfully mix 10 keV He with 200 keV Kr ions and deliver the combined beams to the sample position within the TEM.
4.4.Ion beam monitoring and dosimetry
Ion beam monitoring and dosimetry is provided along the medium- energy and low-energy beamlines by four beam profile monitors and four Faraday cups as indicated in Fig. 3. These have been positioned after each angular deflection of the beams to aid in the alignment onto the correct trajectory, except in the case of the mixing magnet where space constraints prevented this. The beam profile monitors operate by detecting the secondary electrons emitted from a rotating helical wire which sweeps through the ion beam twice per revolution; by virtue of the helical shape of the wire, these two passes are made in orthogonal directions and thus provide x and y profiles of the beam. The small size of the wire (0.5 mm diameter) and high speed of rotation (1140 rpm), have a negligible effect on the beam.
Once inside the microscope, the ion beam passes through a 2 mm aperture (shown in Fig. 7a) followed by a  skimming  Faraday  cup  with a 1 mm aperture. In addition to the  geometry  of  the Faraday cup, electrostatic suppression is applied before and after the skimming diaphragm to return any electrons which may otherwise escape. During an experiment it is not  possible  to  monitor  the  ion  beam  flux  as  the sample occupies the position at which the measurement would,
Table 1
Specifications of the MIAMI-2 system.ideally, be made. Moving the sample to allow insertion of an ion beam monitoring device would incur significant risks to the sample, espe- cially during cryogenic or high-temperature experiments, from physical shocks and from degradation of the vacuum during o-ring motion. Furthermore, re-establishment of the sample position, orientation and imaging conditions would be time consuming incurring delays during experiments.
To provide current metering at the sample position before and after an experiment, a current metering TEM rod is used which features an aperture at the sample position behind which is located a collector   and secondary-electron suppression as shown in Fig. 7b. The skimming Faraday cup is calibrated against this device during the ion beam alignment prior to an experiment thus allowing the flux at  the sam-  ple position to be indirectly monitored during irradiation. Using this calibration, an in-house developed LabVIEW code calculates the flux
(ions cm−2  s−1), fluence (ions cm−2) and dose (dpa) in real-time during
the ion irradiation experiment.
4.5.Vacuum systems
Vacuum pumping of the beamlines is provided by turbomolecular pumps with hybrid magnetic and ceramic ball bearings backed by a combination of scroll pumps and multistage root pumps. These were chosen to reduce mechanical vibrations, noise levels and hydrocarbon contamination which could all potentially be detrimental to the in-situ TEM experiments. The TEM is further protected from mechanical vibra- tions originating from the beamlines by edge-welded bellows located immediately before the ion beam port on the microscope as shown in
Fig. 6. Both beamlines are supported entirely by the upper storey and the services for the TEM are located behind a wall (described above in Section 2) thus providing additional levels of isolation.
5.Experimental results
Early publications generated using the MIAMI-2 system have looked at radiation damage effects in stainless steel [41], tungsten [42], silicon carbide [43], titanium nitride [44] and glasses [45]. Fig. 8 shows a further example of results from a series of experiments on AISI 348 stainless steel demonstrating some of the possibilities for performing EFTEM analysis of irradiation-induced microstructures.
6.Summary
The field of in-situ ion irradiation is currently experiencing a growth period, with two further systems nearing completion in the US and China. As numerous new types of materials from nanowires to high entropy alloy coatings are developed to be used in radiation environ- ments, and even currently used materials require further investigation, it is necessary to study them all  under  similar  conditions.  The  in- situ technique is highly adept at testing these materials quickly and safely, while also able to observe the microstructural evolution, to gain insights into the damage mechanisms. For a year now, the MIAMI-2 system has been established at the University of Huddersfield offering new possibilities for in-situ ion irradiation experiments in a 300 kV Hitachi H-9500 TEM. Building on the capabilities of MIAMI-1, the new system adds analytical techniques such as EFTEM and EDS, high
temporal- and spatial-resolution digital image capture, gaseous sample environments, rapid high-stability annealing using MEMS technology and dual ion-beam irradiation. In addition, the maximum ion energy has been extended to 350 keV (for single-charged species), and the angle between ion and electron beam has been reduced to 18.7◦, which is currently the smallest such angle available on this type of system. A summary of the specifications of the MIAMI-2 system is presented in Table 1. All of these features combine to make the MIAMI-2 system currently the most advanced system of this type in the world.
Acknowledgements
Construction of the MIAMI-2 system was funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, United Kingdom under grant number EP/M028283/1. The laboratories and building modifications to accommodate the MIAMI-2 system were provided by the University of Huddersfield. The authors would also like to thank Hitachi High- Technologies Europe GmbH and National Electrostatic Corporation for their help in the construction of the MIAMI-2 system.