<title>A review of ground-based robotic systems for the characterization of nuclear environments</title>
<author>Ioannis  Tsitsimpelis,  C.  James  Taylor,  Barry  Lennox,  Malcolm  J.  Joyce</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Lancaster University, Engineering Department, Lancaster, LA1 4YW, United Kingdom
b.School of Electrical & Electronic Engineering, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, United Kingdom
</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.10.023</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.10.023</URL>
ABSTRACT
The use of ground-based robotic systems for the characterisation of nuclear environments is reviewed. Almost since the dawn of the nuclear energy industry, man has somewhat inadvertently created environments in which access has been constrained primarily due to the risk posed by extreme levels of radiation exposure but also due to space constraints, and because of toxic and combustible atmospheres. Robotic systems pose an ideal solution to some of these difficulties, removing the need for humans to access such places and frequently providing data on the state of such places that would not otherwise be available. However, each of these requirements is often very different in terms of the specification of a given robot, and the detailed characteristics of a given harsh environment can pose significant challenges even for the most robust of platforms. Furthermore, such devel- opments can be expensive in terms of cost and development time. These issues notwithstanding, robotic solu-
tions to nuclear challenges are reaching a level of maturity where their use is destined to add significant value. This paper considers the salient developments in ground-based solutions from the era preceding the Three Mile Island accident, through Chernobyl and on to the present day and, in particular, the needs of Fukushima Daiichi as attentions turn to this complex robotic suite of challenges.
Keywords:
Nuclear robotics
Nuclear environments characterisation
1.Introduction
During the second half of the 20th century, mankind reaped the rewards of several, far-reaching scientific discoveries that took place in the first half, amongst which was the control of the nuclear chain re- action for generating electricity. Due to its high energy density and thus relatively small requirement for fuel, nuclear power has been exploited extensively. In addition, it has mandated improvements in the robust- ness of materials that are used in nuclear facilities, and this has led to extended performance and increased safety margins. In this regard, advances in materials science and engineering have since been applied  to a wide range of nuclear related tasks, which span from the infra- structure of a reactor and ancillary buildings through to the processes   by which they are decommissioned. For example, static- and monorail- type, tele-operated machines have been in use since the dawn of nuclear energy to handle operations safely in areas of extreme radiation ex- posure  and  to  manage  contaminated  materials  (Hamel  and  Martin,
1983; Wehe et al., 1989); while a number of mobile prototypes were
available during the 1960s (Clark, 1961; Huffman, 1962).
With microprocessor technology flourishing in the mid-70s, re- searchers envisioned diverse but feasible robotic designs that could
replace humans on a wider range of work tasks in radiation environ- ments, including inspection, maintenance, and repair. At the same time, civil nuclear power plants were erected  in Europe  and North America  on a scale never repeated since, and hence it made sense to design and build embracing robotic technology for these purposes.
In 1979, the need for advanced robotic capability became an im- perative because the reactor meltdown that took place in Unit  2  at  Three Mile Island meant that several tasks had to be undertaken re- motely, complementing the use of long-handled tools and what  were then novel vision systems. The first ever radiation survey robot,  for  these purposes, was deployed in the basement of the unit four  years later, in what is regarded as a landmark in the nuclear industry. Seven years after the Three Mile Island accident,  the  catastrophic  accident  that took place in Chernobyl resulted in a strategy to entomb the af- fected plant in sand and clay to limit the extent of ongoing radioactive emissions, and reshaped the interest in the concept of using mobile robots in place of people for nuclear accident response applications.
The technological improvements over the next two decades have driven the design and implementation of highly sophisticated systems, with robotics gaining more and more popularity in mainstream com- mercial fields, such as entertainment, transport and medicine. It was
perhaps only when the Fukushima accident occurred, that we were reminded that current robotic technology was not as readily deployable as was commonly expected. Moreover, the unique circumstances that were revealed following the accident generated the demand for specific, fundamental technological advances. Therefore, in this respect, the requirements associated with Fukushima are a touchstone in this era for the capability of robotic and artificial intelligence in nuclear clean-up,  just as Three Mile Island was thirty-nine years ago. The technology that will result from this decommissioning process is expected to prevent and/or minimize the ramifications of a nuclear accident, while the experience gained will likely benefit the overall safety of current and future nuclear power plants. For example, robotic systems that can provide information about unknown (geometrically and en- vironmentally)  areas  can  be  highly  beneficial;  for  they  may  simplify
scheduled work tasks in intact environments; in terms of navigation and
environment characterisation.
This article discusses the development of terrestrial robots for ap- plications that relate to nuclear power plants, by bringing together various designs available in the literature, exploring the current situa- tion and future directions, and summarizing the design  requirements that should be satisfied to yield new generation robots. The following section presents the background and motivation for developing mobile robotic platforms for nuclear applications. Section 3 summarizes ro-  botic designs from the 1990s onwards, and Section 4 discusses the significance of these developments and presents a set of requirements that are common for all nuclear-related robots; current, prominent re- search questions that have yet to be answered are discussed. Finally, Section 5 presents the concluding remarks of this review.
2.Background
The broader motivation for developing remotely-controlled robots relates to work tasks in inaccessible and hazardous environments; a number of such robots were developed between the late 50s and mid- 70s. For example, the Hughes Mark II Mobot and  an  underwater  crawler, RUM, were state of the art remote handling vehicles, equipped with various tools and manipulators (Clark, 1961). The former and two other  compact vehicles (Little Ranger, Koelsch) were also considered in  a 1962 technical report on the design of remote handling for the NERVA (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) project that was active  at the time in USA (Huffman, 1962; Ledbetter and Paper, 1969). In the UK, between 1972 and 1979, various robotic vehicles that  stemmed  from the efforts of the Central Electricity  Generating  Board  (CEBG)  were being evaluated for routine operations at various nuclear power stations (Friend et al., 1988). These were tracked vehicles developed to
recover debris and provide visual and radiation information.
The primary incentives for developing remotely-controlled robots in the nuclear industry came from the needs to minimize the exposure of workers to radiation, and improve overall productivity. As an example, Fig. 1 shows the 250 days average (labour hours per day) during normal operation of a Boiling Water Reactor (BWR), with routine inspection work tasks causing the majority of overall exposure (Fujii et al., 1976). The authors argue candidly that tasks such as inspecting for steam/ water leakage, valve opening, instrument reading, machine vibration, temperature and overheating, and parts loosening are all dependent on human senses, and propose that the same can be achieved by deploying   a mobile platform that carries relevant sensing capabilities.
The proposed concept was that the motion of a mobile platform is controlled by an operator. The platform is equipped with several sen- sors that feed back to a processing unit and to the operator via a con- sole. The information received is for example, temperature, vibration, radiation, sound and vision. This is depicted by  the  right-hand  side block diagram in Fig. 2. When compared with the block diagram on the left-hand side, which was published 40 years later (Sarkar et al., 2016), one may see that the broader concept hardly differs, and hence a fun- damental set of requirements still applies to this day.
Fig. 1. Approximate length of work tasks per day under radiation and in a control room (Fujii et al., 1976).
By contrast, dynamic changes have taken place  on  a  subsystem  level, including processing speed, overall size and weight of electronics and sensors, the incorporation of semi-autonomous capabilities, and there have been widespread advances in communications. Another contrast with the current state-of-the-art is the unique circumstances that have been unveiled due to degradation of irradiated parts of nu- clear facilities,  and with a great number of them getting closer to the   end of their life-cycle. For instance, out of the 455 reactors that are currently operational, 325 were commissioned between 1968 and 1991 (World Nuclear Association, 2017a); long before relevant mobile ro-  botic systems found widespread use in the industry. Today's circum- stances relate mainly to the working environments in which autono- mous systems are required to function. For instance, the H-canyon air exhaust  tunnels  at  Savannah  River  have  degraded  significantly  over
time,   with   concrete   pieces   having   collapsed,   standing   water  being
present at different parts, and with friable, alpha contamination  and  high beta and gamma doses (Robinson and Smith Jr.,  2004).  Essen-  tially, the same environments are now more hostile and hence the constraints of today's robots are inevitably different in terms of system, performance and implementation requirements.
2.1.TMI-2 post-accident robots
Following the accident at Three Mile Island, in 1979, access to the reactor was heavily constrained for the first two years due to the risk of exposure to such an extent that, eight years later, access to the base- ment was still only possible via  remotely-controlled  platforms (Schwartz and Meininger, 1987a). The facilities that were decontami- nated included the Diesel Generator  building,  the  Auxiliary  building,  the Fuel Handling building, the reactor containment building, and the Unit-2 reactor itself (Brooksbank and Armento, 1980). The diesel gen- erator building was the least contaminated and was a practice area for the approach that would follow on the other facilities, i.e. the use of decontaminants. By that point, mobile platforms that were developed explicitly for TMI-2 addressed tasks like inspection,  decontamination, and dismantling. In total, three different robots were used in the clean- up process: ROVER, LOUIE I, and LOUIE II (Schwartz and Meininger, 1987b). The ROVER (Remote Reconnaissance vehicle, RRV, Fig. 3) was
essentially  a  remotely-operated  multi-tool  on  six  wheels,  with  cap-
abilities including environmental monitoring, video transmission, sampling, and decontaminating. Two of these were deployed in the basement of Unit 2, with radiation levels ranging between 25 mSv h−1 to 10 Sv h−1, and a third was used for training and equipment testing purposes. LOUIE I (Fig. 4) was a small, light duty, (primarily) surveying robot, which carried out radiation measurements in areas where theFig. 2. Two robotic operational block diagrams separated by 40 years. Left (Sarkar et al., 2016), right (Fujii et al., 1976).
Fig. 3. One of the RRVs that were deployed in the basement of TMI-2 (Gelhaus and Roman, 1990).
Fig. 4. LOUIE I: a light duty robot that was deployed in spaces that the RRV-1 would not physically fit (Reilly et al., 1985).
Fig. 5. The SURVEYOR robot, 1985 (Gelhaus and Roman, 1990).
RRV could not physically reach, and in cubicles with radiation ranging between 10 and 30 Sv h−1 (Reilly et al., 1985; Unknown, 1984). LOUIE II, on the other hand, was deployed specifically for the purposes of cutting pieces of concrete.
In the mid-90s, personnel at the Nine Mile Point nuclear station evaluated mobile robotic solutions that could be beneficial in terms of cost and safety for the radwaste retrofit project that had started a few months before. A publication from that period (Kniazewyc et al., 1986) presents some of the commercial and research concepts that were ex- amined by R&D personnel. The first one, SURVEYOR (Fig. 5), was a commercial two-tracked tetherless vehicle with the ability to climb 45° stairs, pass through water of 15 cm in depth, and overcome obstacles up to 23 cm in height.
The ROCOMP was a similar robot, designed to detect radiation, sample air and obtain smear samples, and to undertake mechanical  tasks. Partial navigation autonomy was also integrated in this system. MF3 was a heavy duty tethered, four-tracked platform with the ability    to climb 45° stairs, turn around a 120-cm radius, overcome 60 cm high obstacles, and pass through gaps of 90 cm in  width.  The  RRV,  which was designed for use in Unit 2 at Three Mile Island, was also assessed. Other robots that were evaluated include KLUGE, which was designed    to be a tool caddy, HERMAN (for lifting and dragging heavy objects), ODEX-1 (with novel at the time, six-legged mobility  capability),  ROD  (for decontamination and dismantling), and SURBOT, a small-size en- vironmental surveying robot. Their assessment suggested that SURVE- YOR and an underwater robot satisfy the requirements for further  testing in actual work environments.
Several   other   research   investigations   and   advances   took   place
around the world in the 1980s, with most effort focusing on the im- provement of subsystems. For example, the problem of local and global positioning is a common theme among static and mobile robots, while mapping methods were also being developed (Berry et al., 1983). In addition, testing of locomotion methods that deviate from the classic wheeled and tracked ones also began; see e.g. the ODEX-1 robot (Hamel and Martin, 1983) and the hybrid locomotion robot (Ichikawa et al., 1983). Most significantly, the use of robotics started to receive wider attention in the nuclear industry. For example, the US Department of Energy (DOE) produced a report which summarised the various robotic technology needs in nuclear power plants (US Department of Energy,
1985). Of high priority were considered aspects such as sensors for mapping and the recognition of objects, intelligence for on-the-fly de- cision making, the interface between operator and robot, and accessi- bility. This technology evaluation of decommissioning presented the elements of what is now perhaps considered current practice, including: surveys, decontamination, dismantling and waste packaging. It char- acterised the process of decommissioning as non-routine  coinciding  with the development of specialist systems at that time. Furthermore, it stated that nuclear facilities were not built to accommodate decom- missioning as a major design objective and suggested plant modifica- tions, amongst which were a) access for survey and work robots, and b) contamination monitoring systems. The proposed technological trajec- tory was also clear. For example, the need of technological advances in radiation resistance of mechanical and electronic equipment, robot
sensing,  mobility  and  navigation,  and  data  transmission  from  radio-
active areas was suggested. Moreover, programmes that were initiated   at the same time in Japan and France are cited.
Regarding Japan, in 1983, an eight-year nuclear robotics develop- ment fund ($ 80M) was put forward. The plan included a four year  period for the conceptual design, development and testing of the pro- totype, with a focus on reliability, radiation-resistance and environment response technologies. Some updates on the progress of this are high- lighted a few years later (Miyazawa et al., 1986; Shinohara and Tachikawa, 1989), with crawler, four-legged, and other robot types reported to be at an experimental stage; and with one robot known as AMOOTY featuring ‘star’ wheels to enable it to climb stairs. A further nuclear plant robot was developed and demonstrated successfully, as a result from this national program fund (Konaka,  1991).  It  weighed  three quarters of a ton, and was equipped with a four-legged platform and a multi-fingered manipulator; it could travel on 30° stairs and overcome obstacles up to 20 cm in height. Communication was estab- lished via optical fibre and power was provided by means of a tether.
In their contribution, Gelhaus and Meieran (1986), list 68 available
at the time mobile robotic platforms, 33 of which were primarily de- veloped for nuclear missions, while the rest were modified to operate in nuclear related areas. A comprehensive review paper that discusses the advances of robotics in nuclear power plants between 1985 and 1989 describes, in particular, the status of nuclear robotics following the  TMI-2 accident (Gelhaus and Roman, 1990). Advances reported in this work include robots devised for cleaning (fuel pool, flange), inspection (steam generator, radwaste drum storage area, reactor pressure vessel, water intake tunnels), repair, and object retrieval; amongst which the RRV that was used in TMI-2, the SURVEYOR that was mentioned earlier for the Nine Mile Point power plant, and several mini rovers and water- submersible robots. In addition, limitations in terms of autonomous navigation methods, radiation hardening, maintenance, failure re-  covery, and the design of robot-friendly nuclear plants were discussed.
By 1991, 44 utility companies had used robotic devices to minimize the
exposure of their staff to radiation (Roman, 1991). The investment in the technology by power plants continued to increase (e.g. Hope Creek and  Salem  invested  $1.5M  between  1987  and  1991,  and  achieved
$3.7M in savings (Roman, 1991)) rendering robotics significant in new nuclear power plant designs.
2.2.Chernobyl post-accident robots
By contrast, and influenced at least in part by the magnitude and actions following Chernobyl, the related discussion in  the  literature  from around that period is less prominent. The accident took place in 1986, destroying the reactor and various segments of the building en- velope (Kurnosov et al., 1988). Immediate responses to the accident included sending two tele-operated robots (STR-1) on the roof to clean up the debris but they were disabled by the effects of radiation exposure soon after, with the remainder of the task completed by people working short shifts in what was an extreme environment in terms of exposure.
Another robot, KLAN, was reported to be developed for dosimetric re- connaissance, rubble clearing and decontamination (Potemkin et al., 1992).
The magnitude of the damage was such that shielding of the sur- rounding environment had to take place as quickly as possible, whilst additional issues  of great importance needed addressing; for  instance,  to monitor the core's behaviour, to employ a ventilation system to prevent explosions, and to eliminate the possibility of a self-sustaining chain reaction. One report outlines how those issues were addressed (Kurnosov et al., 1988). The shielding structure comprised a total of 400000 m3 of concrete, 7300 tons of metal structures, and 90000 m3 of sand.
Nine years after the accident, it was reported that the structural integrity of the sarcophagus was declining, with an estimated 1200 m2 of breaks in the roof and walls (Rowland et al., 1995). The primary concern was that an earthquake could trigger the release of radioactive dust clouds. Sending robots to remove the fuel masses and repair structural damages was the only way forward. The latter publication reported on a collaborative effort between the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, the Ukraine Academy of Sciences, the Research Institute of Mechanical Problems, and the Chernobyl Engineering Support Centre, to develop a heavy duty radiation hardened robot. The report addressed the work philosophy and specification requirements for the project.
One very informative piece of literature for Unit-4 of Chernobyl was produced in 1997 (Carteret et al., 1997). The needs assessment that was carried out included the state of the facilities addressed, a summary of requirements, an evaluation of the implementation plan, as well as a list of potentially useful robotic systems. Those were typically classified as characterisation, excavation, dismantlement, and manipulator arms. Regarding characterisation, the idea was to use systems that had al- ready proved to work in hazardous environments, with exemplary ro- bots including the Mobile Automation Characterisation System (MACS) and the Remote Characterisation System (RCS) robots developed by the US Department of Energy; and the NOMAD (developed by NASA). The MACS was equipped with 6 NaI detectors, laser-based navigation and automated surveying capability, whilst the RCS could undertake sub- surface mapping but its GPS based navigation system would allow only exterior operations. The NOMAD could avoid obstacles automatically
and provide high quality images.
The Pioneer (Fig. 6) is one robot reported in the literature to assess the structural integrity of the sarcophagus within the Chernobyl nuclear power plant and to generate a 3D map of the facility. In order to withstand the radiation levels, some of its core components would be tethered outside the area of operation, while  on-board  components were typically shielded by thin lead (e.g. 1.25 cm covering the cameras) (Abouaf, 1998; Denmeade, 1998; Maimone et al., 1998).
Overall, the events at TMI-2 and Unit 4 of Chernobyl established the 1980s as a decade where serious investment on nuclear robotics took place; this being in accordance with investments on nuclear power plants around the world, e.g. from France, USA, UK, and Japan. For example, by 1992, Japan already had 42 commercial power plants generating 30% of the country's electricity (Yamamoto, 1992). In the meantime, between the Chernobyl and Fukushima accidents, and also as a result of the development of systems associated with the clean-up of nuclear legacy facilities, robotic technology evolved significantly. However, those advances were not enough to prevent the escalation of events after electric power was lost (Ishikawa, 2015) that resulted in core damage to units 1, 2 and 3 at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant.
3.Terrestrial characterisation robots from the early 1990s to the present day
During the 1990s, robots were developed for a wide variety of ap- plications, reaching out not only to industry but also to domestic users;
Fig. 6. Pioneer 1, the reconnaissance system that characterised the Chernobyl Unit 4.
for instance, lawnmowers and cleaning robots started to reach a com- mercial level of functionality and reliability for the first time i.e. beyond the cutting-edge technology that had been developed for military and space applications. In the civil and construction industries, semi-auto- matic mobile robotic systems were being adopted as a means of im- proving efficiency, quality and safety. Example prototypes in various application areas included: driverless off-road transporters; floor grinding robots; hydraulic manipulators for site assembly  of  block  walls; devices for automatic cleaning or inspection of tunnel walls; and hydraulic excavators (Bradley and Seward, 1998; Gu et  al.,  2004;  Shaban et al., 2008). As pointed out by Katz et al. (2008),  the  chal-  lenges associated with unstructured environments such as these, are a consequence of the high-dimension of the problem, including robotic perception of the environment, motion planning and manipulation, and human-robot  interactions  (Chen et  al.,  2011;  Gonzalez and  Iagnemma,
2017; Ishida et al., 2012; Lacroix et al., 2002; Russell, 2001; Saeedi
et al., 2016).
In the nuclear industry, research and development in  this  area  is also significant. In the USA for example, around  30  utility  companies had used robots for more than 60 work tasks (Mann, 1992). Climbing robots were developed for use in areas such as the main steam tunnel rooms, feedwater heat exchangers, radwaste buildings and so on. In Spain, Briones et al., 1994, presented a prototype modular robot (Ro- bicen) that was able to traverse walls by means of vacuum suction cups, and was equipped with a sensory system with feed back to the operator console via a communication cable. This robot was equipped with air   and point temperature, humidity, distance, and radiation sensors, along with audio, video and illumination features. All signal processing was undertaken on the sensory module via an Intel 8051 microprocessor, while a second one handled the motion process. The latter was con- trolled manually by the operator. The robot was reasonably small with dimensions  600 × 320 × 300  mm  and  a  mass  of  30  kg.  However, its
load capacity was reduced significantly when travelling on walls (i.e.,
75 kg on the floor, 10 kg on a wall).
Follow-up developments included Robicen II and III (Savall et al., 1999; Serna et al., 1998). The improved design of the former allowed shifting between horizontal and vertical movement on  its  own,  while the latter weighed ∼10 times less than its predecessors, travelled with
approximately twice the speed, and had minimal on-board signal pro- cessing, thus reducing its susceptibility to the risk of radiation damage. All three of the aforementioned robots were built as part of an in- dustrial-academic project for the Spanish nuclear market.
A further series of climbing robots from the 1990s are the ROBUG II, III, and IV (Galt et al., 1997; Luk et al., 1999, 1996, 1991). ROBUG II
was a four-legged robot with the ability  to climb vertical walls. ROBUG  III was produced via the European Commission's Teleman program which was initiated in response to the needs of the Chernobyl accident.   It was designed to walk and climb, drag 100 kg payloads on both floors and walls, access small openings and climb over obstacles. Other design features include the ability to walk on curved and rough/friable sur- faces. The platform is a spider-like 800 × 600 × 600 mm structure comprising eight articulated legs. For both ROBUG III and  IV,  in-  telligent motion control is addressed by employing genetic algorithms, artificial neural networks and fuzzy logic. For example, even though the robot is tele-operated, the eight legs follow a pre-programmed sequence to move, i.e. to travel forward. The Teleman program also sought to produce reliability models that would report upon radiation induced robot failures (Lauridsen et al., 1996). With respect to ROBUG III, the
same  article  presents  estimated  radiation  induced  failure  results, and
reports that with radiation hardened components it would be able tolerate doses above 1 kGy. ROBUG IV was developed as part of the project funded by the European Strategic Program in Research in In- formation Technology (ESPRIT).
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) pursued the research and development of robotic systems through the ORNL Centre for Engineering Systems Advanced Research. A particularly relevant pub- lication at that time reports on their advances (Mann, 1992). The la- boratory had two mobile robot prototypes (HERMIES-IIB and HER- MIES-III), based on which research was undertaken on fuzzy logic control, path planning, high performance computing, and machine learning. HERMIES-III was evaluated for surface contamination surveys of waste containers. Novel functions that encouraged autonomy were tested, including navigation, obstacle avoidance, waste container image identification and end-effector positioning for the radiation detector. In total, 27 on and off-board processing units were utilised for the robot. Another report of this decade suggests that mobile robots can be very useful for routine inspection and maintenance tasks (Fujii et al., 1992). As a case study, it considers potential areas of deployment in advanced
liquid metal reactors (GE-ALMR), including their geometry, radiation
and other environmental conditions; while a proposed tetherless mobile robot with advanced obstacle avoidance is presented. The robot com- bined sonar and infrared sensor data, vision and laser range sensing for navigation, and object recognition via charge-coupled device  tech- nology (CCD) cameras.
Fault identification and action techniques are also important within the framework of improving the robustness of mobile platforms. One study focuses on fail-safe operations to ensure that in the case of loss of control, no damage is caused to the work environment and the robot itself (Tso and Backes, 1993). A logic gate fault tree analysis was de- veloped to identify incorrect robot operation, and safety diagnostics for emergency robot motion shutdown. The study discusses such opera- tions in regard to a dual arm manipulator, yet this is immediately pertinent to mobile platforms that carry out surveying tasks in nuclear environments. Another study further elaborates on this aspect by pre- senting various possibilities of reliability and safety assessment (Langen and Baum, 1995). Examples address optimisation, including software supervision, pre-programmed routines that block the robot going into undesirable areas, inherent diagnostic checks, and transition to re- dundant autonomy (fully tele-operated if necessary).
Increased   flexibility   of   terrestrial   robots   is   reflected   by  design
forethought that enables them to traverse within and over complex pipe networks. Pipe inspection tasks are reported to have accounted for 33% of utility robotic activities in 1993 (Roman and Pellegrino, 1993). Such robots  are  thus  being  developed  to  provide  a  cost-efficient  way  of
surveying pipes that are not immediately  accessible  (i.e.  buried).  Roman and Pellegrino, 1993, discuss features that are desirable on such types of robots. Considerations include quality image viewing, variable lights, reliable mobility, fail-safe manual retrieval, mobility and en- vironment sensors, and user-friendly operator interfaces; while future versions are envisioned to be miniaturised with the ability to travel across any pipe-related terrain and to sample and repair in addition to surveillance. The overview cited above reports on pipe-crawling and other types of robot that were tested between 1990 and 1991, for en- vironmental, fossil fuel, hydroelectric, nuclear, gas and water utilities. Regarding the nuclear industry, pipe crawlers were reported as having been developed for the inspection of a) concrete-lined service water  lines (Brunswick and Indian Point Station-11 nuclear stations), b) air inlets to  check  for blockages and  operation  of valves  (McGuire  nuclear
station),  c)  heat  exchanger  tube  sheets  (Beaver  Valley  nuclear  power
plant) and d) canopy seal welds on reactor head control rod drive mechanisms (Zion nuclear power plant).
Gamma-ray imaging systems for use on mobile robots are also being researched with one particular study (Redus et al., 1994) combining a video camera and gamma radiation detector to afford simultaneous location and identification of radioactive sources in the photon energy range of 0.1–1.5 MeV. It was anticipated that this system could visualise radioactivity distribution with a 6° angular resolution and collimation was used to enable positional information to be obtained. The SWAMI (Stored Waste Autonomous Mobile Inspector) was a semi-autonomous tetherless mobile robot that was developed for the inspection of waste drums (Fulbright and Stephens, 1995). The control system was re- sponsible for the correct operation of the robot subsystems, e.g. navi- gation and positioning, video, radiation detection, and drum barcode recognition etc. The mobile platform was off-the-shelf (Transitions Research Corporation, Helpmate) and had been employed previously in hospitals areas. The barcode reader would identify which waste drums
had been inspected, whilst the video subsystem comprised six cameras,
strobe  lights  and  video  compression  hardware.  Radiation  monitoring included sensitivity to alpha and beta radiation in alarm or count mode, while  positioning  was  achieved  via  rotating  lasers.  All  these  systems were  integrated  on  board  via  Versa  Module  Europa  (VME)  cards  that utilised  the  Motorola  68030 architecture.
A novel planetary (three-wheel assembly) wheel system was im- plemented on KAEROT, a robot designed for maintenance and inspec- tion tasks (Kim et al., 1995). The purpose of this novel means of loco- motion was to provide a more stable navigation on stairs and over obstacles. Related studies presented path planning and automated stair climbing algorithms that were developed for these purposes, with ex- perimental results suggesting that greater motion stability had been achieved. Kaerot/m2 was designed for the inspection of pressure tubes in Pressurized Heavy Water Reactors (PHWR). It utilised a radiation hardened 8051 processor and it featured fail-safe functionalities to ensure its retrieval (Kim et al., 1999). The third version of this robot (Kaerot/m3) was based on a crawling platform, and was modified for the Korean Hydraulic Nuclear plant to withstand a 100 kg payload, allowing it therefore to carry appropriate tooling for emergency stop valve manipulation (Seungho et al., 2010).
In  1998,  Perret  reported  on  the  state  of  the  LMF  robot  that  was
being manufactured at the time by a private company (Cybernetix, for KHG GmbH) (Perret, 1998). The robot was developed to withstand up    to 10 KGy of radiation. Useful considerations are presented such as the technical issues that relate to a) the choice of motors; for example, thermal motors use up air and hence filters are needed to prevent contamination, b) stability, especially when traversing along stairs of different steepness, c) choice of locomotion, d) choice of  communica- tion means, e) radiation tolerance, f) user-friendliness of control soft- ware and g) overall size and capability of the robot. The LMF robot was developed to travel on four tracked wheels, with the ability to cross trenches and obstacles as wide and high as 40 cm. The  power supply  was  fitted  into the robot  by means  of  a battery  pack with  a   hydraulic arm also mounted on it. Communication was established by either radio link or by a 100-m umbilical. A Siemens 88C166W addressed all pro- cessing, while multiplexing and other features such as a stand-by mode in case of transmission loss were also incorporated. Another study utilised the LMF to carry a rotating 3D laser scanner with the focus to undertake 3D mapping of nuclear environments (Roennau et al., 2010). The results of a ten-year research programme on tele-robotics for   the Spanish nuclear industry were presented in 2003 (Iborra et al., 2003). The motivation for this stems primarily from reducing personnel exposure but it also highlights the fact that standard service robots can minimize the uncertainty in scheduling nuclear maintenance services due to the intermittent use of human resources (as workers who have reached the maximum allowed radiation dose cannot work in radiation areas for a certain amount of time). Their results mostly highlight static
robots that are useful in areas such as those associated with the steam
generator, reactor cavity, reactor vessel and head, but also present two mobile robots: the inspection and retrieving vehicle (IRV) and the cleaning and retrieving vehicle (CRV). Both  can  operate  underwater  and inside pipes. However, the mobile platform is based on tracks, and hence both may be used in terrestrial work tasks as well.
The Savannah River Technology Centre (SRTC) has long had several mobile  robots  for  carrying  out  various  tasks.  They  were  either  devel- oped in house or modified from existing designs. A technical report that dates  back  to  1995  presents  the  robots  that  were  used  for  these  pur- poses  (Teese,  1995).  The  first  investigation  of  mobile  robots  at  SRTC took  place  in  1986,  with  the  Autonomous  Laboratory  Vehicle  with Autonomous Navigation (ALVIN). A Cybermotion K2A was employed as its base and it was further modified in an ad-hoc manner for prototyping purposes.   SIMON   was   an   improved   version   of   the   aforementioned MACS  (developed  by  US  DOE and considered for  Chernobyl), in  terms of  navigation  and  processing  depth.  A  worm  robot  equipped  with  a plasma-arc  cutting  torch  was  used  for  the  modification  of  the  ventila- tion system piping. In particular, it was desired to divert the exhaust air from a plutonium handling facility to a sand filter system. On account of the  robot's  capabilities,  costly  shutdown  of  the  facility  followed  by
excavations  to  allow  personnel  access  was  prevented.  SWAMI-II   was
reportedly used for waste drum inspections. It incorporated laser sen- sors that could identify and characterise structural condition such as bulges, dents etc. Finally, a wall crawler was developed for various nuclear applications. For instance, at the Savannah River Site, it was utilised to produce wall thickness maps of High Level Waste tanks. Further contributions of SRTC are outlined in 1996 by Lewis and Teese, with mentions to the aforementioned waste tank crawler and CRADA, a small diameter pipe crawler.
In 2003, researchers from the SRTC deployed a sacrificial mobile robot to investigate the environment of the H-Canyon exhaust tunnels, which had not been accessed since they were built in the 1950s (Robinson and Smith Jr., 2004). The purpose of the inspection was to identify potential leakage locations and to assess structural integrity, as high gamma-radiation levels were reported in areas where there was the risk that airborne contamination could be released. The robot was designed to be able to access a 0.09 m2 opening, and traverse 12 m along a 3 × 3 m tunnel. It was controlled remotely (i.e. without au- tonomous functionality) and a rotating camera was utilised to identify leakage points and to inspect piping and the general structure of the tunnel. A similar type of robot was developed and tested in 2009 (Minichan et al., 2011). A basic requirement for this mission was for the robot to cover a much longer area (length up to 120 m). In this tra- jectory, efforts were made to reduce the size of the tether by using an Ethernet-based communication system. A third crawler under test was also presented in the same publication. This was a four wheel crawler with a Pan-Tilt-Zoom (PTZ) camera, which was being assessed in mockup areas of the air tunnel. In 2014, SRS deployed a fourth in- spection vehicle. It had a custom scissors lift in order to carry our duct inspection along the tunnel. The mission ended when it tipped over. Due to that, a recovery vehicle was deployed in 2015 but it was decided
eventually to continue the inspection of the tunnel for a further 55 m from the jammed robot (Gilliam et al., 2015; Kriikku et al., 2015; Tibrea et al., 2015).
A snake-type robot was utilised in Ringhals Reactor no 1, in Sweden, to  repair a leakage coming from the pipes that are part of  the control  rod drive mechanism located below the reactor vessel (Buckingham and Anscombe, 2005). For this purpose, an exact replica was developed to ensure that the snake robotic arm was able to complete its mission successfully. Although the arm was fixed to a monorail structure, its ability to reach and repair areas that were meant to be inaccessible throughout a facility's lifecycle renders it of interest to future applica- tions where it may be able to navigate more freely.
Cortez et al., 2007, present a miniature (5.5 cm) robot, called Khepera II, which was equipped with a very small radiation sensor to identify locations associated with high radiation levels (other relevant studies include Cortez et al., 2009, 2008). This project implemented an interesting, automated sequential nuclear search strategy that focuses on the distribution of radioactivity within a large area. The adopted strategy involves moving the platform on a predefined planar grid and the use of a radiation sensor to identify the absence or presence of a radiation source on a statistical basis. Luk et al., 2006, review in their work the robots they developed, i.e. the NERO (nuclear electric robot operator), SADIE (Sizewell A duct inspection equipment), ROBUG-II, and Roboslave series robots. This included remarks on their perfor- mance in nuclear tasks, as well as advantages and limitations.
One study presented an approach where two mobile robots are
utilised for various uses within a power plant (wired and wireless) (Ma  et al., 2014). The wired version can provide power supply to  the  wireless robot, and it can also be used as a charging station, whilst the wireless robot goes into the power plant and mounts several  repeaters to allow wireless communication. The latter is also designed to go to the top floor and release balloons equipped with cameras to provide visual information. This is a six-track, crawler-type machine, with four arm tracks and two tracks below the chassis. An interesting feature found here relates to the monitoring of the positioning of the arms with minimal electronics. In particular, a potentiometer-like configuration is mounted around the arm tracks so that when they are moving, a brush wipes the potentiometer surface, achieving monitoring of position in a low-cost and accurate manner. The material of the chassis is aluminium alloy 7075 (aerospace, radiation tolerant); it weighs 56 kg and its size is 812–1198 × 644 × 222 mm.
Guan et al., 2014 presented a two legged, five-degree-of-freedom,
wall-climbing robot that uses suction cups. It is  equipped  with  a  camera, a dosimeter, a humidity sensor and a wireless video trans- mitter. The navigation system utilises signals from a distance sensor, an inclinometer and a pressure sensor. The embedded control system in- corporated a ST Microelectronics microcontroller (STM32F103)  based on an ARM core. The robot's mass is 1.1 kg, its size is 245 × 100 × 100 mm and was evaluated for its navigation and obstacle avoidance cap- abilities.
More recently, Dong et al., 2016, presented a waterproof, tracked- wheel robot that incorporates stair-climbing capability via additional swing arm tracks. The main body houses the battery, the motors, and wireless communication equipment. The latter is housed in a separate segment of the body to avoid electromagnetic interference due to the power device. Radiation protection is provided by means of cadmium- selenium shell on the camera of the robot, a tungsten/silicon resin shielding strap over the internal electric components of the body, and silvered paper on the wiring. Swing arm posture and motion control is included in a human-machine interface. The authors include the de- velopment of an algorithm for the control of the robot's motion. No information is given about the sensors that are utilised in the system. Its size is 860 × 556 × 345 mm.
A mobile robot equipped with a scintillation detector for surveying
an area with gamma radiation is outlined by Miller et al. (2015). The detector  is  surrounded  by  a  lead  sheath  so  that  only  the  incident
Fig. 7. The RESCUER robot (Guzman et al., 2016).
radiation is detected. Moreover, it provides a full 180° rotation to for- mulate directional profiles. The motivation behind this setup was to identify the direction of nearby radiation sources. The chassis is a Lynxmotion 4, on which a rotating platform is mounted. A lanthanum bromide (LaBr3) detector is connected to a Hamamatsu R6231 photo- multiplier tube and the controller is a Lynxmotion Bot board II with a BasicAtom Pro 28 processor.
RESCUER is a robot that is designed for the detection of aggressive agents and for sampling, but also for human rescue scenarios (Fig. 7) (Guzman et al., 2016). An important feature that relates to the robotic systems reviewed in this article is the development of a method to decontaminate the robot after its mission, so that any risk that resident contamination might have posed to workers in terms of radiation ex- posure is removed. This includes applying an additional coating to the body of the robot in order to optimise decontamination. The robot shown in Fig. 7 features a multi-sensory system, mapping capability and a human-machine interface that also allows for semi-autonomous op- eration. Its chassis is halogen-free and radiation hard. The structure is made up of polycarbonate stainless steel, AISI 304 BA (Fe/Cr18/Ni10). Navigation includes the utilisation of flipper absolute encoders and a differential global positioning system. It is further equipped with a front bumper to push obstacles and it can be fitted with either wheels or four
tracks.   For   sampling,   a   gripper   and   a   sampling   container   are  in-
corporated.
Another accident investigation robot is reported to have two and four-legged locomotion capability (Kim and Jang, 2016). Its body structure has been designed in such a way so that most of the weight is  to the back of the robot, which is curved. Hence, in the event of a fall, it will fall behind and damage would be minimised. For positioning, the authors used landmark localisation, which employs barcode stickers at
various  points  within  the  containment.  This  limits  its  usefulness  fol- lowing  an  accident  since  the  facility  must  have  those  barcode  stickers mounted, a priori. However, future nuclear facilities that do employ this method  in  the  first  place  may  lower  the  complexity  of  the  navigation task.
A novel characterisation robot was recently presented by  Ducros  and  Hauser  (2017).  The  RICA  robot  weighs  80 kg  and  its  size  is   570 × 430 × 330 mm. It is developed and used for characterizing nu- clear environments by locating and measuring the levels that radio- active sources yield. It is split in two, one  being  the motion  part, which is essentially a chassis with polymer tracks. The upper part comprises two cases, with the first one containing two CCD cameras for front and rear view; white LEDs to provide illumination and a motor that moves a gamma radiation camera. The other part contains the electronic circuits and communication platform. It can be set up with different toolkits depending on the purpose, i.e. for sampling it uses a mechanical arm whereas for mapping it uses the gamma  camera (see  Fig. 8).  Shielding  of the latter is done with tungsten alloy, which increases the overall weight  by  17 kg.  The  camera  detects   energies  between  50 keV  and   2 MeV.  The  radiation  dosimeter  is  based  on  a  Geiger-Mueller  tube
(6150  AD5,  Saphymo)  and  the  gamma  spectrometer  is  based  on  a
CdZnTe crystal. The power supply and signal acquisition is undertaken via a single, hardened 100 m coaxial cable. All the electronics were test- irradiated (rates of 1.8, 2.1, and 3.10 Gy h−1) and its performance was evaluated by 20 3-h long missions in an actual nuclear environment.
More recently, a novel and modular approach was presented, ad- dressing inspection tasks at hard to reach areas, such as the SRS H- Canyon exhaust tunnel (Voyles et al., 2017). The approach involves the integration of two robotic components. The first one, MOTHERSHIP (Modular Omnidirectional Terrain Handler for Emergency Response,
Fig. 8. RICA robotic platform with gamma camera on the left and manipulator arm on the right (Ducros and Hauser, 2017).
Fig. 9. Mothership and modular snake cooperating during an inspection de- monstration (Voyles et al., 2017).
Serpentine and Holonomic for Immediate Placement), comprises 2-D tread modules that are expandable to form as many links as desired.    The treads are arranged discretely on the outer surface of a hollow cylinder, whilst the driving module incorporates a novel ring gear  system. The CMU modular snake robot comprises 1 degree-of-freedom (DOF) modules which can be configured in various ways, depending on the movement patterns one wishes to carry out. The latter is attached to MOTHERSHIP, and its end effector may facilitate sensing  instruments and manipulators (Fig. 9).
4.Discussion
Mobile robotic systems for nuclear applications have been in use for almost half a century, whilst arguably the most significant  technolo-  gical advances have taken place in the last two decades. High-perfor- mance computing has increased the reliability and accuracy of in- strumentation, and new materials have been formulated to increase the radiation tolerance of electronic and mechanical components. These advances have helped to reduce the time that personnel are exposed to radiation, they have decreased the need for manual labour in con- taminated environments and have enabled access to previously in- accessible, confined and oxygen-limited spaces (Bloss, 2010; Bogue, 2011; Gelhaus and Roman, 1990). Furthermore, thanks to these ad- vances, robotic system designers now have a vast number of options to choose from when tailoring a robot to a particular mission. These in- clude for example, its size, its locomotion mechanism, the instruments and tools it may carry, its human-machine interface (HMI), its control
flow, navigation, diagnostics and data processing.
In turn, this allows for the emergence of new and/or the optimisa- tion of existing features. For instance, one study proposed a tethered contactless means of powering robots from several km, with the aim being to prevent the power cable from getting tangled up (Choi et al., 2012). Recently, another study presented a novel gamma imaging and source localisation approach, integrating data from a Compton gamma camera and LIDAR sensors (Lee et al., 2018).
Equally extensive research activities on the other hand, do not focus on a specific robotic mission, yet they present cutting-edge research in order, for example, to increase the radiation resistance of mechanical and electronic components as well as to improve computing reliability. Examples include undertaking irradiation tests on optical fibres (Coenen and Decreton, 1993), position sensing using laser systems (Decreton, 1995), and other sensory components, communication, ca- bling and connector (Diggins et al., 2015; Garreau et al., 2013; Han    et al., 2015; Kuwahara et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2018; Sharp and
Decreton, 1996; Sinclair and Chertov, 2015; Van Duy et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2013). Similarly, high end computing is also regarded as greatly important (Bagatin et al., 2017; Lin et  al., 2016; Nancekievill et al., 2016; Ostler et al., 2009; Schmidt et al., 2012; Sterpone et al., 2005; Wu et al., 2011). Furthermore, global advances have already proved to be beneficial for the robotic community. For instance, the Robotic Operating System (ROS), is an open source middleware that was developed at Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, which simplified greatly all aspects that relate to the remote control of a robot. ROS is now used widely in both industry and academia.
In this regard, two features stand out. Firstly, it is clear that, even though the concept has remained unchanged in the sense that a robot undertakes a series of pre-specified tasks and does not completely re- move the humans from the control loop, robotic subsystems have  evolved in a step-change manner. In addition, it has been shown re- peatedly that the technology exists to enable robots to  function  in  nearly every area of nuclear reactors. As such, part of the problem potentially lies in the lack of attention directed towards their estab- lishment in the nuclear industry. The following takes the  Fukushima  case as an example.
4.1.Pre-and-post-Fukushima robots: the gap
It was not possible to avert the progression of the accident in Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant via the use of robotic systems that might have been pre-programmed to act as a last resort because, if they did exist, they were not available. Soon after the reactors in Units 1–3 were damaged, the priorities were to restore cooling of the reactor systems and to limit the release of radioactivity, most of which origi- nated from Unit 2 and ground debris arising as a result of the hydrogen explosions in Unit 3 and its propagation to Unit 4 (World Nuclear Association, 2017b). An international effort has since began with tasks following a survey-decontamination approach, with the ultimate goal being to locate the fuel debris, recover it and package it in waste con- tainers thus allowing full decommissioning of the site to progress. Al- though several terrestrial, underwater and heavy-duty robots have been deployed throughout the last seven years since the accident, it is per- haps surprising that most of these were not readily available or suitable
to aid the clean-up activity.
About a decade before the accident, a series of emergency response robots were developed in Japan, motivated by the  criticality  accident that took place in a fuel processing unit in Tokaimura, in 1999. The development of the robots was supported and funded by the Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI). One of these robots, namely SWAN, was presented in 2002 (Hosoda et al., 2002). The robot was developed to use a manipulator for preventing disasters by opening and closing valves. Using a transformable crawler mechanism, three cameras for vision, one for manipulator point-of-view, and a variety of tools and sensors, it had the capacity to traverse on 40° slopes, open and close doors; and sample smear, gas and reactor water. Semi-autonomy was incorporated by available control algorithms that are activated optionally for traversing on stairs and over obstacles. For these pur- poses, inclination and proximity sensor data are used in control loops.
The robot was successfully tested in a mock-up reactor environment.
Another article of that period presents the Remote Surveillance Squads (RESQs, as shown in Fig. 10) (Kobayashi et al., 2002). These robotic units were developed specifically to survey contaminated lo- cations, by means of radioactivity, environmental, and image data collection. More specifically, one lightweight wheeled (RESQ-A) and two heavy duty tracked (RESQ-B/C) vehicles were developed. RESQ-A and B performed surveying tasks while RESQ-C was equipped with tools for cutting, cleaning, and sampling.
Another accident preparedness project was developed by Mitsubishi in 2002 (Isozaki and Nakai, 2002). Two heavyweight  robots,  MARS-A and MARS-T were designed to open and close doors and valves, as well  as cleaning, whilst the latter was integrated with decontamination
Fig. 10. RESQs A to C, from left to right(Kobayashi et al., 2002).
capability by means of spraying water. Their platforms enable them to traverse on 40° slopes, 1 m landing depth and they could operate for a few hours in environments of up to 10 Sv h−1.
SMERT-M and SMERT-K are robots developed by TOSHIBA in 2002 (Yuguchi and Satoh, 2002). The former navigates on a retractable  crawler mechanism and is equipped with a multi-axial arm, an ele-  vating mechanism that carries the sensor unit and a dedicated frame for carrying SMERT-K. The sensor unit can detect gamma rays and neu- trons, as well as humidity, temperature, oxygen and hydrogen con- centration levels; while its CCD and infrared cameras are radiation hardened. The SMERT-K is a wheel-type robot that is used to do quick, preliminary inspections. Both robots can operate either wired or wire- less, while two extension cable drums are used which also act  as  wireless hubs if needed. The robots were evaluated in mock-up en- vironments, although no information is available with respect to their levels of autonomy.
The RaBOT was also developed following the Tokaimura accident
(Oka and Shibanuma, 2002). It was designed to operate in extreme radiation environments (reportedly up to 105 Sv) and comprised dual, articulated manipulators and four crawlers. Its sacrificial parts were the CCD cameras and control boards, which were modular and could be replaced remotely when needed.
A study in 2012 summarizes various aspects following one year of using emergency response  robots  at  Fukushima  Daiichi  (Kawatsuma  et al., 2012). It is reported that most of the robots that were built fol- lowing the 1999 accident, were either not fit for undertaking a mission (due to physical constraints and/or lack of maintenance), or several modifications had to be done. For example, the RESQ robots could not    be repaired due to critical information being lost, while the size of the MoniRobo-1 robot was deemed too heavy and at risk of damaging the surrounding infrastructure. In order to deal with this setback, JAEA modified one Brokk-40 (JAEA-1), and two RESQ-A robots (JAEA-2/3). JAEA-3, which is seen in Fig. 11, was modified for undertaking gamma  ray imaging on various floors of the reactor buildings, and was de-  ployed in Unit-2 six months after the accident.
To date, several robots have operated in various levels of all the
affected units at Fukushima, many of which were reconnaissance type. These are indeed fundamental robots, because decommissioning and any other work planning can go ahead as the environment is uncovered, especially in terms of the recognition and localisation of radioactive sources and levels. The first robots to undertake reconnaissance tasks were two Packbots and TALON, which were donated by USA to un- dertake radiation mapping and cleaning. Other robots that did similar investigations the same year were JAEA-3 (Modified RESQ-A) and Quince, which was redesigned to operate reliably in the presence of radiation (Kawatsuma et al., 2017, 2012; Nagatani et al., 2011; Rohmer et al., 2010). A fascinating blog describing the initial deployment of robots at Fukushima-Daiichi was written by one of the nuclear opera- tors working at the site (Guizzo, 2011).
Later   versions   of   Quince   were   deployed   from   2012   onwards.
Between 2012 and 2014, two robots were used for investigation of the
Fig. 11. JAEA-3 with gamma imaging system (Kawatsuma et al., 2012).
torus room in Units 2–3; the Four-legged walking robot in Unit 2, and   the Survey Runner (see Fig. 13) in Unit 3. The former was designed to walk along the cat walk of the torus room and comprised a smaller unit, which was deployed to enter and investigate narrow spaces on  top of  the suppression chamber and the vent pipes. Another  investigation  robot was employed to operate from the upper part of the suppression chamber, extending a camera to underwater locations in order to seek leaking spots (Hitachi GE tele-runner). Frigoma was put to use in 2013   to collect information about the ambient dose rate and survey the area near the access point of the Primary Containment Vessel (PCV). The High-access investigation robot surveyed the upper spaces of all reactor buildings, specifically in the upper space of the 1st floor. The Kanicrane   is a robot that similarly investigated the upper areas of the  1st floor  of all units. Rosemary and Sakura  are two robots that were used together  to provide information about the status of the 2nd and 3rd floors of all
units. This small investigation device, essentially a tiny, tracked wheel
robot fitted with a smartphone, was used in Unit 3 for initially in- vestigating the PCV equipment hatch. Kinoshita et al., 2014, describe applications that were developed in response to the accident,  including   a novel gamma camera with pan/tilt and shutter mechanisms, mounted on a tracked wheel vehicle; it was deployed in Unit-3  to  detect  hot  spots. Other reported advances in the same article relate to the remote control of robots, decontamination approaches, and treatment of con- taminated water.
The two most recent robots, namely PMORPH (Shape Changing Robot, see Fig. 12), and SCORPION were developed to fit through a 100 m diameter pipe that gives access to the interior of the PCV of Unit 1. At least three PMORPHS were used, encountering radiation doses between 3 and 17 Svh−1. The SCORPION was the latest robot that attempted to investigate the PCV interior of Unit 2, and the seventh to be abandoned.
Fig. 12. PMORPH series robot used inside the PCV of Unit-1 (Tepco, 2017).
Fig. 13. Survey runner robot, used for leakage inspections (Tepco, 2017).
SCORPION survived unexpectedly less time than was expected, after encountering radiation levels of 650 Svh−1 (radiation resistance, 1000 Gy). All the aforementioned robots, and e.g the two shown in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13. are outlined on TEPCO's website (Tepco, 2017).
4.2.Recommendations for robotic design requirements
Most relevant research works that propose novel functionalities, or present the results of these, describe various factors that form the basis for system design and development. Common are descriptions and figures on the geometry of a targeted area, and environmental
conditions,  followed  by  proposed  and/or  developed  solutions.  Some representative  examples  are:  "Narrow  path  with  sharp  corners"  (Fujii et al., 1976), ''Positioning sensor to accurately stop the vehicle at inspection position''   (Nakayama   et   al.,   1983),   ''Manipulation   of   varying   loads 0–25 Kg'' (Kniazewyc  et  al.,  1986), ''Sample floor sludge'' (Schwartz  and Meininger,   1987a),  ''Inspect  valve  orientation''  (Gelhaus   and   Roman, 1990),  ''Use  optical  wheel  encoders  and  proximity  sensors  staggered  for different  depths  to  determine  passing  doorways  or  external  architecture'' (Roman,  1991),  ''Obstacle  avoidance  using  sonar  and  infrared  sensors'' (Fujii  et  al.,  1992),  ''Eddy  current  to  locate  welds  in  pipes''  (Roman  and Pellegrino,  1993),  ''Incorporate  fail-safe  diagnostics'',  ''Collision-free  navi- gation  down  a  narrow  aisle  of  storage  drums''  (Fulbright  and  Stephens, 1995),  ''Drag  100 kg  payload  horizontally''  (Luk  et  al.,  1996),  ''Cross 400 mm wide trenches'' (Perret, 1998), ''Multiplexing to keep umbilical link flexible and light'' (De Geeter et al., 1999), ''Direction compensation using a gyroscope  sensor''  (Hosoda  et  al.,  2002),  ''Sense  oxygen  and  hydrogen density'' (Yuguchi and Satoh,  2002), ''Withstand airflow rates of 10 miles per hour'' (Robinson  and  Smith  Jr.,  2004), ''Non-wireless communication
was required'' (Nagatani et  al., 2011).
Even though the requirements that underlie these descriptions are usually laid out textually in an ad-hoc manner, it is presumed that in  most cases the developers will have based their solution on a  concise  and systematic set of requirements. There are several approaches to produce such a set, and equally several  starting  points.  For  instance, one may typically start by answering questions that relate to the mis- sion's environment and trade-off capabilities, such as determining whether their robotic system will be sacrificial or desired to be re- trieved. The former and latter will indeed form plenty of requirements. For instance, the benefit of creating a sacrificial robot is that one may develop a low cost working prototype in order to test features such as mapping algorithms and advanced navigation. On the other hand,  a  robot that is intended to be reused may need heavy shielding to protect the sensors and electronics, whereas extra computing functionality may be required to ensure that radiation does not induce large errors in
instrumentation measurements.
Analytical system design approaches can be very helpful as they will help categorise these requirements and uncover their in-between de- pendencies. Proposed solutions will be usually checked  against  the  latter and will define the global and local features of the robotic system. Virk, 2003, for example, discusses the importance of modularity (i.e. breaking down a robotic system to several subsystems), through the CLAWAR project (Climbing and Walking Robots), which aims to bring forward open design protocols for the robotic community. The project includes twenty technical tasks carried out by institutions and private companies, and spanned from identifying common to special require- ments, tailored to a specific industry's needs. Another approach ad- dressed the practical design of robots in radioactive environments, by giving emphasis on the electronic components level (Oomichi et al., 2007).
Regardless of the approach taken, it is useful to break the robotic
system down into subsystems. The exemplar shown in Fig. 14 corre- sponds to a conceptual robotic system split into five broad (but not definitive)  subsystems,  comprising:  the  mechanical  design,  the sensing
Fig. 14. Exemplary  robot  system  and subsystems.
capabilities, diagnostics, communication, and electronics. A similar design basis was specified for the CLAWAR project, comprising the mechanical design, sensors, actuators, computing hardware/software, and communications protocol.
A systematic investigation by breaking further down the subsystems such as the ones depicted in Fig. 14 is good practice as it may predict   and prevent critical errors that would otherwise become apparent  during development and testing.
An exemplary investigation may be undertaken using the Holistic Requirements model (Burge, 2011). This model facilitates a number of tools that can be combined in order to derive and satisfy all the desired requirements of the main system and subsystems. A typical categor- ization is splitting the requirements into (i) functional i.e. what are the system's functionalities, (ii) implementation i.e. how will those func- tionalities be achieved, and (iii) performance i.e. how well will the functionalities carry out their tasks. Furthermore, system requirements will determine vital features of the system. All these requirements may be derived through various tools and/or interviews and previous ex- periences, and solution analysis may be applied to ensure compatibility at all levels. The level of detail for satisfying the requirements of each subsystem depends on what the developers and users wish to achieve. For instance, for a scenario where the aim is to build a sensing instru-
ment, one would proceed to satisfy a basic set of requirements for the
embracing technology (i.e. by purchasing off  the  shelf  components)  with respect to the targeted area of operation, while most of the focus (e.g. down to material level) would be given on the subsystems of the sensing instrument.
5.Conclusions
The purpose of this article was to review the development and utilisation of terrestrial robotic systems for nuclear environments, by considering how demand has been generated and also reviewing their evolution to date. The main findings are that there is a lot of experience with using robotics in the nuclear industry which indicates that the
technology exists and yet opportunities remain where there is the need for a robotic solution but a suitable candidate does not yet exist. The example of Fukushima Daiichi is a specific case where a number of requirements fall into this category.
Section 2 provided the key background information of the emer- gence of mobile robotic solutions, which primarily related to enhance the workers' health and safety, but also landmark events, such as the Three Mile Island accident. Section 3 presented various robotic systems in literature from the 1990s up to date, which indicated the vast amount of research that has taken place, but also the fact that most systems are not universal, i.e. unique requirements are found in most applications. Section 4 considered why the maintenance of robotic so- lutions and their preventive application could be of great benefit to the nuclear industry and public safety, and the potential for system design to lead the maturity of this key application area of 21st century robotic capability was considered. Table 1 summarizes some of the character- isation robots that are available in the literature and mentioned in this review.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the support of UK Research and Innovation via the TORONE consortium, grant reference EP/P018505/1. This work is in part supported by the EPSRC project EP/R02572X/1. Malcolm J. Joyce acknowledges the support of the Royal Society via a Wolfson Research Merit Award.
Table 1
An outline of the characterisation robots that were reported in this review along with their primary purpose and operating area where specified. Although inevitably incomplete, this table is representative of the usefulness of characterisation robots for in-situ waste segregation and decommissioning planning. In communication column: T: tethered, W: wireless. The operating area indicates at least one application for these robots, while variants of each may also have different means of locomotion and interface to the operators.
