<title>Improved Cumulative Fission Yield Measurements with Fission Spectrum Neutrons on 235U</title>
<Affiliation>1.Energy & Environment Directorate, Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99352, USA 2.National Security Directorate, Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99352, USA 3.Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA</Affiliation>
<author>B. D. Pierson,1, ∗ A. M. Prinke,2 L. R. Greenwood,1 S. C. Stave,2 R. S. Wittman,2 J. G. Burch,3 J.
T. Harke,3 S. W. Padgett,3 J. J. Ressler,3 G. Slavik,3 A. Tamashiro,3 A. Tonchev,3 and W. Younes3</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR DATA SHEETS</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Inc.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nds.2019.01.005</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nds.2019.01.005</URL>
Two isotopically-characterized targets of high-purity (99.84 0.03%) 235U-oxide and a neutron dosimetry package  were exposed to a pulsed neutron irradiation using the Godiva critical assembly    at the National Criticality Experiments Research Center. Following irradiation, the ﬁssioned targets were counted with a broad-energy germanium detector. Estimates of the total ﬁssions for each target were made using measurements of well-known ﬁssion products. The total ﬁssion values were then used to measure the ﬁssion yields of 21 ﬁssion products with half-lives between 636 and 119,700 seconds. Mean values of seventeen of the measured ﬁssion products fell within the 95% conﬁdence level of the Evaluated Nuclear Data Files VII.1/b (ENDF/B-VII.1) using the larger of the two uncertainties: 84gBr, 89Rb, 91Sr, 93Y, 97Zr, 101Mo, 105Ru, 128Sn, 129Sb, 130gSb, 131Sb, 131mTe, 133I, 135I, 141Ba, 142Ba, and 142La. Seven isotopes were measured to better precision than is listed in the ENDF/B-VII.1 database: 89Rb, 93Y, 128Sn, 129Sb, 130gSb, 131mTe, and 133I. Four of the measured isotopes were found to be statistically diﬀerent from the ENDF/B-VII.1 database: 94Y, 134Te, 134I,  and 138Xe. Two of the isotopic analyses conducted in this paper ﬁt the parent and daughter data simultaneously. The parent-daughter pairs measured in this way were  the  134Te/I  and  142Ba/La pairs. The ﬁssion yield results obtained in this way are unique, especially for 134I, because the parent and daughter half-lives are so close. Given the limited number of direct measurements of the 134Te/I pair from fast neutron induced ﬁssion and the seemingly high estimate for 134Te from previous work, it is likely that the value in this paper is more accurate;  however, additional measurements of this   pair are needed to validate this assertion.
I.INTRODUCTION
Fundamental nuclear data is used broadly across many disciplines in nuclear science. From nuclear power, to medicine, to nuclear forensics, this data is the bedrock of all scientiﬁc calculations, estimates, and predictions made by scientists and engineers in service to the broader pub- lic. One component of nuclear data used broadly are the probabilities of forming diﬀerent ﬁssion product pairs fol- lowing neutron induced ﬁssion of actinide series elements, known as ﬁssion yields.
Studying the energy dependence of ﬁssion product yields from neutron induced ﬁssion is made diﬃcult by the lack of available high-ﬂux mono-energetic neutron sources (<1 MeV). Given this limitation, several of the
ﬁssion yields for ﬁssion products with half-lives less than 2 days have not been well measured, and in some cases never measured [1–4].
In this study, two high-purity 235U-oxide targets,
provided by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), were exposed to a neutron spectrum from a well established source, the Godiva critical assembly housed at the National Critical Experiments Research Center (NCERC) [5–9]. After irradiation, the high-purity 235U targets were counted using a Lynx data acquisition de- vice acquiring data in list-mode from a 65% relative- eﬃciency broad-energy germanium (BEGe) detector for ﬁssion product yield measurements (see Ref. [2] for addi- tional details).
II.BACKGROUND
Historically, ﬁssion yields have been measured using  a variety of diﬀerent techniques such  as  rapid chemi- cal separation using pneumatic or gas-jet systems [10– 13], charge-mass separation using electric/magnetic ﬁeld selection-based mass spectrometry [14–17], and whole sample counting using radiation spectroscopy [18, 19].
These three techniques listed have unique advantages and disadvantages relative to one another. Techniques based on chemical separation, like the gas-jet technique, have higher elemental yields than techniques based on mass separation for volatile elements but pose a contam- ination risk and cannot be used to measure ﬁssion prod- ucts with half-lives shorter than 100s of milliseconds.
Techniques based on mass separation are capable of isolating speciﬁc isotopes for analysis. Mass separation, paired with radiation spectroscopy, has produced some of the most precise ﬁssion product yield measurements to date [14].
Techniques based on radiation spectroscopy vary widely depending on the type of radiation used for anal- ysis. Radiation spectroscopy using direct detection of ions, as is used in SPIDER [20, 21], provide high iso- topic selectivity. SPIDER’s selectivity is proportional to the distance the Frisch gridded ion chambers are from the target but detection eﬃciency is inversely proportional to the square to the distance, making it diﬃcult to balance the two. Radiation spectroscopy using gamma-ray emis- sions is dependent on the accuracy of the fundamental nuclear data of the ﬁssion product isotopes but is one of the cost-eﬀective methods of measurement. One fact of note is that many of the gas-jet, mass-separation, and radio-spectroscopic measurements were not conducted until later in the 1960’s after the invention of the lithium- drifted germanium (GeLi) detector [22, 23]. Fission yield measurements from bulk ﬁssion product gamma-ray spec- tra were diﬃcult if not impossible before the advent of GeLi and now high-purity germanium (HPGe) detectors. Neutron energy was a predominant concern for the measurements made in this study. Godiva provided a well-known and documented neutron spectrum in a sin-
gle, order-millisecond, pulse. The pulsed nature of this ir- radiation limited both the additional uncertainties caused by variable irradiations and the complexities of account- ing for parent-daughter production. The technique used to acquire the data was neutron irradiation paired with post-irradiation gamma-ray spectroscopy.
III.EXPERIMENT Target Preparation
High-purity 235U-oxide targets (99.84 0.03% 235U), fabricated at LLNL, were used for this experiment. Two targets, one large and one small, were prepared at LLNL from the stock powder by loading nominal masses of 63.0 and 8.6 milligram-equivalents of 235U-metal into separate quartz ampoules. Quartz wool was packed into the quartz tube to ﬁx the 235U-oxide in-place within the ampoule be- fore heat sealing them. The targets were heat sealed in quartz to retain the ﬁssion gases during counting. Fig. 1 is a photo of the two prepared targets.
The larger target was prepared and irradiated with the smaller target to keep the data acquisition count-rate elevated after the smaller target activity had decreased appreciably. The larger target provided better counting statistics for the longer lived (>10 hrs) ﬁssion products.
FIG. 1. (Color online) A photo of the two high-purity 235U- oxide targets (nominally, 63.0 mg left, 8.6 mg right) and quartz wool plugs heat sealed in quartz tubing. Each quartz tube is approximately 3 cm long and 0.4 cm in diameter with an inner diameter of 0.3 cm.
Detector Setup
A 65% relative-eﬃciency, Mirion BEGe detector was set up horizontally shrouded on four-sides by a copper- lined open lead box. The detector was placed inside the lead shield to reduce room background observed by the detector and the copper liner attenuated x-rays emitted by the lead shielding. The detector was placed 8.8 cm from the target and shielded using a 1.5 cm thick disk of teﬂon followed by a 0.159 cm thick iron disk to decrease the detector sensitivity to ﬁssion product x-rays and 235U x-ray ﬂuorescence produced by the ﬁssion product β− emissions after irradiation.
Detector Characterization
The set of calibration standards used to optimize and measure the energy, resolution, and eﬃciency calibrations included ﬁve precision point sources and a custom Eckert & Zeigler multi-gamma standard (1.17% uncertainty in activity at 1σ). The ﬁve point sources contained activities of: 22Na, 60Co, 133Ba, 137Cs, and 152Eu. The Eckert & Zeigler gamma standard was prepared by drying a gravi- metrically measured aliquot of liquid gamma standard onto a 4 mm diameter piece of ﬁlter paper, rolled, and slipped into a matching quartz tube. The multi-gamma standard was prepared in this way to match the counting geometry of the 235U-oxide targets as closely as possible. Calibrating the detector in this way captured the impact of gamma-ray attenuation from the quartz tubing in the measured eﬃciency. Fig. 2 is the measured eﬃciency for the detector used for ﬁnal reporting in this experiment.
FIG. 2.
(Color online) A plot of the measured full-energy
peak eﬃciency measured using the multi-gamma standard and
residual distribution of the ﬁt.  A dual-polynomial ﬁt to the  data was used, the equations are provided in the inset legend where x represents the gamma-line energy. The blue dashed line represents the eﬃciency function below 122 keV and the black dotted line the ﬁt above.
Irradiation
Two ampoules along with a witness foil package were loaded into the center of the Godiva critical assembly and exposed to a single pulsed irradiation. The witness foil package contained high-purity copper, gold, cobalt, iron, and titanium wires. Activities observed in these wires were used to estimate the neutron ﬂuence of the expo- sure. The targets were retrieved from Godiva shortly after the irradiation. The small target was placed 8.8cm from the face of the BEGe detector for list-mode gamma counting 230.2 minutes after irradiation and was later replaced by the larger target 290.77 minutes after irradi- ation. Data were taken for a total of 7 days. The switch between small and large targets was made to increase the data acquisition rate; thus, improving the statistical precision of ﬁssion product measurements made at days- after-irradiation.
The large 8.8 cm distance was used to minimize the impact of cascade summing corrections on the spectra. Simulations of the cascade summing corrections were con- ducted using GEANT4 [24] for 99Mo, 133I, 140Ba, 140La,147 clides were found to be negligible.
IV.DATA & ANALYSIS
Spectra were analyzed using Mirion’s Genie2000 soft- ware. Spectra loaded into Genie2000 were analyzed us- ing a step-based process. First, the spectra were ana-
lyzed using a second-diﬀerence peak search algorithm. Next,  distances between peaks were compared against   a user-deﬁned threshold based on the measured resolu- tion calibration to identify single peaks and multiplets. After sorting, peaks were ﬁt using the sum of a low-tail Gaussian function and either a linear or step based back- ground estimation function, depending on which back- ground function gave better residual χ2. Peaks within multiplet regions were ﬁt simultaneously for better back- ground estimation. Each peak ﬁt was visually reviewed and in many cases manually reﬁt using the Mirion’s In- teractive Peak Fitting software; this utility was crucial in providing reliable data quality because of the complexity encountered within the spectrum. Fig. 3 is the spectrum acquired from the small target during the 230.2 minutes of counting.The analysis was further enhanced by the excellent res- olution achieved using BEGe detectors. The full-width at half-maximum at 1332 keV was measured to be better than 1.6 keV as shown in Fig. 4.Peak areas from the spectra were then used to estimate the activity of the ﬁssion products at the end of the irra- diation (burst-time). A ﬁrst pass analysis was conducted using only ﬁrst-order Bateman decay corrections to iden- tify cases where higher order Bateman corrections were needed. Speciﬁc activities corrected to a concurrent time are expected to be similar. Cases where this was not true
FIG. 3. (Color online) Gamma-ray spectrum acquired from the small target during the complete 230.2 minutes of acquisition. A subsection of the spectrum from 500-700 keV is provided to illustrate the complexity of the acquired ﬁssion product gamma-ray spectrum and emphasize both the need for excellent energy resolution and careful ﬁtting of the data.
FIG. 4. (Color online) Detector 8815’s energy resolution mea- sured using the Eckert & Zeigler multi-gamma standard.
indicated additional corrections were needed. Standard deviations were calculated from the burst-time activities for all measured isotopes and compared to the uncertain- ties of the individual measurements. Cases where the standard deviation was larger than the average measure- ment uncertainty were re-evaluated.
In some cases the ﬁrst-order corrections were unable to provide a time-invariant estimate of the burst-time activ- ity and were reﬁt using the second-order Bateman decay correction. For example, the decay of 134Te feeds the activity of 134I. In this unique case, both the parent and daughter were observed together. Data from both were ﬁt using ﬁrst- and second-order decay corrections for 134Te and 134I, respectively. Peak area data from both 134Te and 134I were minimized simultaneously using non-linear χ2-minimization to make the best measurement of the ﬁssion yields of both isotopes. Cases where the parent
terfered isotope by using other gamma-lines not aﬀected by interference to subtract from the activity of the iso- tope of interest. The increase in statistical uncertainty from the interference correction is included in the ﬁnal reported activities from the software. Cases where the interference correction could not be made because of mul- tiple interferences were not included in the evaluation.
Second-order Bateman decay corrections were gener- ally applied in cases where the parent nuclide’s half-life was >5% of the daughter’s half-life as was the case for 134Te/I. These two isotopes are linked in the same decay chain as parent and daughter where the 134Te half-life (41.8 min.) is 79.6% of the daughter’s, 134I, half-life (52.5 min.). The eﬀect of ingrowth on ﬁssion yields measured using ﬁrst-order Bateman corrections biases the measured results high. Fig. 12 exempliﬁes this eﬀect. Fig. 5 is a  plot of the measured and expected atom-densities pre- dicted using the ﬁssion yields provided in Table VI; it illustrates the eﬀect 134Te feeding has on 134I and the excellent agreement between the measured data and the
model ﬁt.
FIG. 5. (Color online) A plot of the measured and model estimated atom-densities of 134Te and 134I as a function of time after the irradiation. The point-wise estimates are given  as open circles for 134Te and open squares for 134I.
One limitation of this correction methodology lies in the equations themselves. The solution to the ﬁrst-  order Bateman equation (D1(τ, f )), adjusted by the ir- radiation time (τ ), integrated over a counting time (Δ) and scaled by the ﬁssion yield probability (Y ) is equiv-(λ = ln(2) · T −1 ), gamma-ray self-shielding (Fss), and
dead-time (F corrections and normalized by the ef-ﬁciency (ε), gamma-ray branching ratio (Γ), and total ﬁssions in the actinide target (σf ΦN ) where σf Φ is the double-integral of the product of the energy dependent microscopic neutron ﬁssion cross-section and neutron ﬂux over all energies and over the irradiation time, and N is
the total atoms of target actinide. The relationship of ﬁssion yield to counts is provided in Eq. (1),
@1
As noted earlier, the ﬂux is time-dependent as noted in Eq. (2). Time-dependence complicates the calculation of the total ﬁssions and illustrates the importance of using a pulsed neutron source like Godiva. Because the irra- diation length is trivial relative to the half-lives of the measured ﬁssion products, the ﬂux can be approximated as a weak function of time, simplifying Eq. (2) as shown
@2
All of the terms on the right side of Eq. (3) can be found in the literature [25] or were directly measured from the experiment,
@3
speciﬁcally the total number of ﬁssions using well-known ﬁssion products. This is made possible by assuming the product of λτ  1 and applying a Taylor-series expansion to the build-in factor during irradiation. Dividing the left-hand side of Eq. (1) by the integrated equation on the right provides an experimental measurement of the ﬁssion yield. In the case of the solution to the second-order Bateman equation (D2(Y1, Y2, τ,f )), this is no longer the case. Eq. (4) is provided for comparison,
@4
The second-order function replaces the right-hand side daughter convolved together (Y1 and Y2, respectively)
within  the  integral.    In  this  case,  peak  area measure-
ments at multiple time intervals spanning the entire de- cay history of the linked decay chain must be used to     ﬁt the integrated second-order function using non-linear χ2-minimization to produce an estimate of the parent nuclide’s cumulative ﬁssion yield and the daughters in- dependent yield. Cases where feeding was a concern re- quired evaluation of both the parent and daughter peak areas simultaneously; however, the parent was not ob- served in all cases. Cases where the parent was not  observed  necessitated  the  insertion  of  a  parent ﬁssionyield to ﬁt the peak areas from the daughter. Rather  than ﬁt the time-varying activity for both the parent and database was used. This method was chosen because the parent ﬁssion yields were generally known in cases where ingrowth aﬀected the measured data.
Total Fissions
Total ﬁssions in each target were estimated using two methods. The ﬁrst method made use of the measured activities from the ﬁve witness foils irradiated with the actinide targets. Activities in the witness foils mea-  sured after the irradiation were used to estimate the neutron energy proﬁle using well-known neutron reaction cross-sections from IRDFF [26], an input estimate of the neutron energy proﬁle obtained from MCNP6 [27], and the neutron spectrum adjustment software suite STAYSL PNNL [28]. The STAYSL PNNL software suite was used to correct the measured speciﬁc activities of the witness foils for neutron and gamma self-shielding before using them as input to the neutron spectrum adjustment rou- tine. The corrected speciﬁc activities were provided as input to STAYSL PNNL to adjust the estimate of the neutron spectrum and covariance matrix to minimize the diﬀerence in the measured and calculated activation rates in the witness foils. The adjusted neutron spectrum out- put from STAYSL was used to estimate the mass-speciﬁc ﬁssion rate of 235U. This mass-speciﬁc ﬁssion value mul- tiplied by the irradiation time and target mass can be compared to the total ﬁssions estimated using the second method.
The second method used to estimate the 235U ﬁssions relies on well-known ﬁssion products like 99Mo. Using Eq. (1), activity measurements of ﬁssion products with well-known ﬁssion yields were used to estimate σf ΦN . The total ﬁssions in each target were estimated using  two separate isotope lists, one for the small and large target. The isotope lists are diﬀerent for each target be- cause the time-regimes in which data were collected from each target were diﬀerent. Speciﬁcally, more shorter-lived isotopes were seen in the small target at early times and more long-lived isotopes were seen in the long count of the large target. The incident neutron energy dependence of several of the reference ﬁssion products were recently examined in a joint collaboration between LANL, LLNL, and TUNL [29]. Careful examination of the energy de- pendence of peak ﬁssion products is crucial to relative ﬁssion yield measurements like the one contained in Ta- bleVI. As these ﬁssion yields change and are improved, the precision of the measurements reported in this pub- lication are expected to also improve.
The isotope lists used for the small and large targets are provided in Tables I and II, respectively. The total ﬁssions measured using these isotope lists were compared to the STAYSL mass-speciﬁc ﬁssions by dividing by the gamma count estimated 235U masses of each target. The ﬁnal ﬁssion yields reported only use the total ﬁssions es- timated using the aggregate total ﬁssions obtained from the well-known ﬁssion products to avoid the added uncer- tainty associated with the mass of the target estimated using gamma analysis.
TABLE I. Total ﬁssion estimates made using the provided list of isotopes for the small target and accompanying ENDF/B-
VII.1 Watt ﬁssion spectrum ﬁssion yields.
TABLE II. Total ﬁssion estimates made using the provided list of isotopes for the large target and accompanying ENDF/B-
VII.1 Watt ﬁssion spectrum ﬁssion yields.
Gamma Self-shielding
The last correction was the self-shielding correction factor, Fss. Uranium is a dense, high-Z material that strongly attenuates gamma-ray emissions below 200 keV. The ﬁssion products were measured from within the uranium-oxide target material. This correction estimate was made from gamma counting the targets before irradi- ation. Activity estimates made using gamma-rays at 143, 163, 186, and 205 keV emitted by 235U are presented in Fig. 6, with and without correction.
The correction was produced using Eq. (5), where μ(E) is the energy-dependent mass attenuation coeﬃ- cients (cm2 g−1) and x is the product of the material density and “eﬀective” thickness of the target (g cm−2). Values for μ(E) for uranium-oxide were obtained from the National Institute of Standards & Measurements: XCOM
FIG. 6. (Color online) 235U activity “as measured” and cor- rected for self-attenuation.
database [30] and treated as having negligible uncertainty relative to the uncertainty in the 235U activity measure- ment. Using the XCOM attenuation cross-sections, the four activity measurements were ﬁt to a constant value using Levenberg-Marquardt non-linear χ2-minimization to solve for the attenuation-corrected speciﬁc activity and
the linear-density using Mathematica [31],
@5
Uncertainties & Correlation
The ﬁssion yields reported in this publication depend on the total ﬁssions estimated using the ﬁssion product yields of the radioisotopes listed in Tables I and II and are thus positively correlated i.e. increases in the ﬁssion yield of these reference isotopes will decrease the total es- timated ﬁssions thus increasing the measured ﬁssion yield of a given isotopes as shown in Eqs. (3) and (4).The given uncertainties for these isotopes are signiﬁcantly smaller than the total standard deviation in the total ﬁssions un- certainty; any changes in the reference isotope uncertain- ties are unlikely to shift the average total ﬁssions outside of 1σ of the reference ﬁssions value. The positive correla- tion between the measured ﬁssion product yields and the reference ﬁssion product lists are assumed to be captured in the standard deviation.
V.RESULTS & DISCUSSION
There were several measurements conducted to obtain ﬁssion yield estimates: 1) an empirical self-attenuation correction using gamma-counting, 2) total ﬁssions for each target were measured from the gamma emissions  of several well-known ﬁssion products and independently veriﬁed using neutron dosimetry techniques, and 3) ﬁs-sion yields were made by  applying Eqs. (1) and (4) to  the delayed gamma-ray peak area data. As noted in Sections III and IV, the uncertainty contribution from the attenuation correction was determined from gamma counting the uranium targets before irradiation and eval-uating Eq. (5) and photon absorption cross-sections from the NIST XCOM database.
The uncertainty contribution from the self-attenuation plotted as a function of energy are provided for the small
uncertainty is larger in the small target because of the poorer counting statistics in the 4 gamma-lines used to derive the attenuation correction.
FIG. 7. (Color online) 235U attenuation correction and uncer- tainty as a function of energy for the small target.
FIG. 8. (Color online) 235U attenuation correction and uncer- tainty as a function of energy for the large target.
The simulated neutron energy spectrum and adjust- ment are provided in Fig. 9. The energy spectrum is in good agreement with the simulation for neutrons 3 MeV and below. For neutrons above 3 MeV, the neutron ﬂux is suspected to be softer than was estimated using MCNP but is a small fraction of the total ﬁssion generated. Ini- tial values for the ﬂuence covariance matrix were made using a Gaussian formalism described in the STAYSL PNNL User’s Manual [28]. The Gaussian formalism as- sumes positive covariance in adjacent ﬂuence-energy bins
using a user-deﬁned bin range. During the adjustment process, the ﬂuence covariance matrix was updated using the witness foil cross-section covariance matrices. Co- variance in energy regions that produced the majority   of the activation in the witness foils decreased based on the certainty with which the witness foil activities were predicted using the adjusted neutron ﬂuence. The ﬁnal ﬂuence covariance matrix is provided in Fig. 10.
Fig. 10 illustrates that the ﬁnal ﬂuence covariance ma- trix has the strongest correlations in and around the peak of the Watt  ﬁssion spectrum at  1 MeV. The covariance   is most signiﬁcant along the center-line as expected. The sum-product of the 235U neutron cross-section and ﬂu- ence provided an estimate of the speciﬁc ﬁssions expected
235
10
1
101
102
103
103
102
101
1	10
1024
200
150
100
50
0
50
in	U. The cross-section and estimated ﬂuence covari-
ance matrices were used to estimate the uncertainty in the STAYSL PNNL estimated speciﬁc ﬁssions. The val- ues listed in the bar-legends on the right-hand side of the Fig. 10 may be used to estimate the variances and covariances in the ﬂuence (cm−2 sec−1) using Eq. (6) where δ is the value in the bar-legend. The values ob- tained using Eq. (6) may seem large; however, the values within the covariance matrix are the products of the ﬂu- ence variances from each energy bin. The square-root of the product variance is the standard deviation of the ﬂu- ence along the diagonal of the matrix. These values are expected to be large because the ﬂuence was on the order of 1014 cm−2,
@6
FIG. 9. (Color online) The unadjusted (black) and adjusted (blue) estimates of the neutron ﬂuence are provided along with the percent adjustment (red).
In addition to measuring the gamma-ray self- attenuation correction factor and corresponding uncer- tainty from the pre-irradiated 235U counts, target mass estimates were made by dividing the measured target ac- tivities by the speciﬁc activity of 235U. Estimates of the masses and linear-densities of the small and large tar- gets that were used to check the total ﬁssion values mea-
FIG. 10. (Color online) Estimate of the ﬂuence covariance ma- trix generated after adjusting the neutron spectrum to better reﬂect the measured activities in the witness foils.
sured from each target against the estimate from STAYSL PNNL are provided in Table III.
Table IV contains the measured mass-speciﬁc ﬁssions and uncertainties from STAYSL PNNL and the small and large targets. The mass-speciﬁc ﬁssions and uncertainties from the small and large target include the uncertainty in the target mass provided in Table III. Mass uncertainty is not included in the ﬁnal measured ﬁssion yields; it is not required as noted in Eqs. (1) and (4) because the activities measured from the ﬁssion products include tar- get mass. Mass cancels out of the ratio of the left and right-hand sides of Eqs. (1) and (4) while making a ﬁs- sion yield measurement. To use the STAYSL estimated mass-speciﬁc ﬁssions, the mass uncertainty and STAYSL uncertainty would be combined in quadrature. This un- certainty is smaller than the uncertainty derived using known ﬁssion products as the basis; however, these un- certainties should agree and experimental systematics not captured using STAYSL were likely captured while mea- suring the ﬁssions basis from the isotopes listed in Tables I and II. The larger uncertainty was used to avoid under- reporting the precision of the reported measurements.
Other contributors to the ﬁssion yield uncertainties like
branching ratio, half-life, ﬁssion-rate, eﬃciency, and the dead-time corrections are included in the analysis from the  Genie2000 software.   Table  V  lists  the  sources and
magnitudes of the isotope speciﬁc uncertainty contribu-
tions in this analysis. Uncertainty contributions from the masses were not included in the analysis because the to- tal ﬁssion estimates used in Eqs. (1) and (4) were mea- sured independent of target mass. It is worth noting that uncertainties in the ﬁssion yields for 84gBr, 91Sr, 134Te, 134I, 138Xe, 141Ba, and 142Ba provided by ENDF/B-VII.1 are lower than their branching ratio uncertainty, a sys- tematic uncertainty. One possible explanation for this discrepancy is that these isotopes were measured using
TABLE III. The mass estimates derived from the non-linear least-squares ﬁtting of the attenuation correction. These values were provided for reference and were only used for cross-checking the ﬁssions estimated using STAYSL PNNL against those measured using the reference ﬁssion products provided in Tables I and II. The masses were not used to quantify the ﬁssion yields reported to decrease the sources of error.
TABLE IV. Fission-rate estimates from the isotope lists pro- vided in the text and using the STAYSL PNNL software suite.
radiochemistry and beta counting techniques; however,  a review of measurements listed in EXFOR [32] indi- cate that several measurements of 134Te were published with uncertainties smaller than the branching ratio un- certainty [33, 34] and the uncertainty in the ﬁssion nor- malization factor was not provided.
FIG. 11. (Color online) First-order estimates of the ﬁssion yield of 134Te. This estimate matches the value reported in Table VI. The parent isotope, 134Sb, has little eﬀect on the atom population of 134Te following irradiation because of its low yield and short life-time.
From Fig. 12,  it  is  clear  that  the  second-order ﬁt is a more accurate estimate of the the data acquired from 134I over time. The ﬁssion yield of 134I was re-evaluated by ﬁxing the ﬁssion yield of 134Te to the value provided in ENDF/B-VII.1. The direct measurement of 134Te was found to be statistically diﬀerent from ENDF/B-VII.1. This discrepancy indicated additional information might be gathered from careful study of the 134Te/I decay pair. The parent of 89Rb was never observed and the par- ent ﬁssion yield was ﬁxed at 3.98 0.08%, as listed in ENDF/B-VII.1. Fig. 13 illustrates the agreement be-
FIG. 12. (Color online) First-order estimates of the ﬁssion yields 134I and 134Te. The ﬁt to 134I illustrates the ratio of
true ﬁssion yield at time zero.
tween the second-order decay function and the raw data. The measured ﬁssion yield was found to be in good agree- ment with ENDF/B-VII.1 but the uncertainty was im- proved by this experiment.
Table VI provides the measured and ENDF/B-VII.1 ﬁssion yields and corresponding uncertainties for compar- ison. Results obtained using higher order ﬁtting included simultaneous minimization of both small and large tar- get data weighted by their respective total ﬁssions values. The ﬁssion yield for 97Zr measured in a recent evalua- tion conducted on measurements from work performed with the Prospero and Caliban critical assemblies from 1970 to 1980 by Laurec and Casoli [4, 35] were in agree- ment while the 133I ﬁssion yield was determined to be 5.90(27)%, much lower than the current evaluation indi- cating possible losses of this volatile element.
TABLE V. Sources of uncertainty at 1σ used in Eq. (1) and Eq. (4) to measure the ﬁssion yields provided in Table VI. Data used in the ﬁnal measurements were taken from Nudat 2.0 in 2011.
TABLE VI. Final ﬁssion yields measured from the small and large target and compared against the Watt ﬁssion spectrum  ﬁssion yields provided in ENDF/B VII.1 [36]; items marked by were analyzed using second-order Bateman decay corrections. The uncertainties reported in this table for the ﬁssion yields are absolute uncertainties at 1σ i.e. the measured ﬁssion yield of 89Rb was 3.99±0.36%.
FIG. 13. (Color online) First-order estimates of the ﬁssion yields 89Rb. The ﬁrst order estimate in this case is about 25% higher than the actual ﬁssion yield reported in Table VI.
VI.CONCLUSIONS
Twenty-one ﬁssion product measurements are reported in Table VI. Mean values of seventeen of the measured ﬁs- sion products fell within the 95% conﬁdence level of the Evaluated Nuclear Data File ENDF/B-VII.1 using the
larger of the two uncertainties [36]: 84gBr, 89Rb, 91Sr, 93Y,  97Zr,  101Mo,  105Ru,  128Sn,  129Sb,  130gSb,  131Sb,
131mTe, 133I, 135I, 141Ba, 142Ba, and 142La. Seven iso- topes were measured to better precision than is listed in the ENDF/B-VII.1 database: 89Rb, 93Y, 128Sn, 129Sb, 130gSb, 131mTe, and 133I. Four of the measured isotopes were found to be statistically diﬀerent from the ENDF/B-
VII.1database: 94Y, 134Te, 134I, and 138Xe.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory is operated for the U.S. Department of Energy by Battelle under Con- tract DE-AC05-76RL01830. This work was funded by the Oﬃce of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Research and Development within the U.S. The views expressed here do not necessarily reﬂect the opinion of the United States Government, the United States Department of En- ergy, the Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, or the Nuclear Criticality Experiments Research Center
The work conducted for this publication was in concert with the NCERC. The Nuclear Criticality Experiments Research Center (NCERC) is supported by the DOE Nu- clear Criticality Safety Program, funded and managed by the National Nuclear Security Administration for the De- partment of Energy.
