<title>NG-14 SEALED-TUBE HIGH-POWER NEUTRON GENERATOR FOR NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGIES</title>
<Affiliation>Dukhov All-Russia Research Institute of Automatics (VNIIA), Moscow, Russia</Affiliation>
<author>S. V. Syromukov, R. V. Dobrov, A. V. Mel’nik,V. V. Stepnov, and V. I. Sysoev</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-015-9945-1</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-015-9945-1</URL>
Modern neutron generators are direct-action accelerators which are used to realize the thermonuclear reactions 3H(d, n)4He or 2H(d, n)3He. Generators with sealed gas-filled tubes are widely used in industry and scientific research [1, 2]. The physical processes in such setups, including the ionization of deuterium and tritium, acceleration of the ions obtained, and neutron production as a result of thermonuclear reactions, occur in the hermetic volume of a sealed neutron tube. This prevents radioactive tritium from entering the atmosphere and makes it possible to create controllable fast-neutron sources, which are safe when switched off. Until recently, generators of this type with flux >3·109 sec–1 were not produced in our country. The NG-14 high-power compact neutron generator with a GNT1-80 sealed gas-filled neutron tube was developed at the Dukhov All-Russia Research Institute of Automatics (VNIIA) [1–3].
The working flux of D–T- or D–D-neutrons in NG-14 equals 2·1010 or 2·108 sec–1, respectively. The generator is powered from the grid (220 V, 50–60 Hz). The power consumption equals 600 W. There are no high-voltage cables in the generator; this expands its applicability.
The NG-14 neutron generator is characterized by relatively small size, control simplicity, stable flux, and quick pre- paration for operation after connection to the grid. All this makes the NG-14 neutron generator a promising and accessible electrophysical source of fast neutrons at high intensity for practical and scientific problems.
The NG-14 neutron generator is comprised of a radiation setup, power supply and control block, a controlling com- puter, and a cooling setup (Figs. 1 and 2). The GNT1-80 tube is the main physical device of the generator and determines the latter’s characteristics. After the service life is exhausted, this tube must be replaced with a new one at the factory. Since a rammed target is used in the tube, the flux remains unchanged during the entire operating time of the generator.
The GNT1-80 tube is secured on a flange of the radiation setup, which comprises a cylindrical container filled with a liquid dielectric. The high-voltage source, which makes it possible to accelerate the ions of the hydrogen isotopes, is locat- ed in the interior volume of the radiation setup. The generator does not contain any high-voltage cables or cable in-leads, which made it possible to decrease its size and, mainly, expand applicability. For example, the radiation setup can be placed in a closed bounded space in any position or it can be moved while an object is being irradiated. In the UVP-7101M setup for checking passenger baggage for the presence of explosives, the NG-14 neutron block is arranged in a narrow closed chan- nel in special shielding above the transporter [4]. For radiobiological studies, the NG-14 unit used for such purposes is placed on a support above biological objects [5].
The target part of the tube extends beyond the boundaries of the neutron block. This makes it possible to minimize the distortion of the primary neutron spectrum; this is important in some applications. In addition, such a design makes it pos- sible to place the irradiated sample next to the radiating region of the target, in a location where the neutron flux density has its maximum value [6]. The neutron energy variance is at a minimum when the irradiated object makes an angle of approximately 90° with the target. The potential of the target relative to ground is zero. The body of the radiation setup is also grounded and is not an electric hazard for personnel.
Fig. 1. NG-14 neutron generator.
Fig. 2. GNT1-80 sealed neutron tube.
Fig. 3. Arrangement of the NG-14 neutron generator: 1) radiation setup; 2) neutron-forming target; 3) power supply and control block; 4) cooling block; 5) biological protection; 6) controlling computer; 7) operator’s station.
Fig. 4. Timing diagrams of the accelerating voltage (1) and ion current (2) during the operation of the NG-14 neutron generator.
The ion beam heats the target. For this reason, the NG-14 neutron generator has a setup for cooling the target sup- port by means of a closed water loop. The water film on the support is 2 mm thick, which cannot introduce any appreciable distortions into the neutron spectrum. During operation not only the target of the neutron tube but also body of the radiation setup is cooled.
The autonomous cooling setup makes it possible to generate neutrons continuously. This permits the user to work continuously with a constant current. The instability of the flux does not exceed 5%. An example of the arrangement of the NG-14 neutron generator in a research laboratory is shown in Fig. 3.
The generator is controlled from a computer by means of special software with a convenient interface. Operation is possible in an automatic or a semiautomatic mode. In the semiautomatic mode, the operator sets the accelerating voltage, the ion current, and the irradiation time. After the setup is prepared, the operator has about 30 sec to begin irradiation. When the NG-14 generator is used as part of another setup, for example, the UVP-7101M setup for checking passenger baggage, the generator can be controlled via the software of this setup [4]. The control system not only makes it possible to execute the given program but also to continuously monitor the most important parameters of the generator. Different ways to block the operation of the generator, which greatly reduce the effect of the human factor on the operation and safety of NG-14, are also provided. Detailed timing reports are produced automatically for many parameters of the generator during the operating ses- sions. As an example, the timing diagrams of the accelerating voltage and ion current of the NG-14 generator are displayed in Fig. 4. The generator is switched on and off three times. The time of each irradiation session is 60 sec in this case. Diagram 1 shows the time variation of the accelerating voltage in the generator’s neutron tube. Diagram 2 pertains to the ion current. The small oscillations in the current diagram at the initial stages after the generator is switched off are associated with a par- ticularity of the automatic regulation of the pressure in the GNT1-80 tube. After the generator is switched off, the ion current rapidly drops to zero, and the accelerating voltage gradually drops off exponentially.
The characteristics of the NG-14 generator are as follows:
Eight NG-14 neutron generators have been built and are in operation.
