<title>Comparison of an Electrothermal Plasma Source to a Light Gas Gun for Launching Large Cryogenic Pellets for Tokamak Disruption Mitigation</title>
<Affiliation>Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee</Affiliation>
<author>T. E. Gebhart, S. K. Combs & L. R. Baylor</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1372683</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1372683</URL>
Abstract — Future large tokamaks, such as ITER, will require a reliable technique for rapid energy dissipa- tion to mitigate harmful effects from disruptions. Two main methods developed for disruption mitigation are massive gas injection and shattered pellet injection (SPI). Argon and neon are favorable materials for both injection methods. When launching pellets with SPI, it has proven difficult to launch intact pellets of pure argon and/or neon owing to their high material strength at cryogenic temperatures. In this work, we compare two methods of launching relatively high-Z pellets. An electrothermal plasma source is an experimental alternative to the fast opening, high-pressure, gas valve. The electrothermal source was used to launch Lexan™ pellets with approximately the same size and mass of comparable mixed gas (D2 and Ne) cryogenic pellets launched by gas guns. We describe comparisons of achieved pellet velocities, energy efficiencies of each system, and the implications of implementing each respective method on an operating tokamak.
Keywords — Tokamak disruption mitigation, pellet injection, electrothermal plasma source.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
In future large tokamak devices, such as ITER, the first-wall thermal excursions, forces from  eddy  and  halo currents, and runaway electron formation from a disruption event are predicted to be much more signif- icant than seen in current, smaller devices.1 Therefore, disruption mitigation (DM)  has  become  a  research topic of increasing interest to fusion programs world- wide. There are two primary methods currently being used for DM: massive gas injection (MGI) and  shat- tered pellet injection (SPI). SPI consists of launching large cryogenic pellets, normally consisting of deuter- ium, neon, or argon, into an angled surface where the
pellet is shattered and subsequently injected into  the  core of the  tokamak  plasma  at  high  speed  (300  to  800 m/s) (Ref. 2). MGI is the process of using high- flow-rate gas valves located near the plasma to deliver     a large quantity of gas to the plasma. This gas diffuses into the core of the plasma to induce a thermal quench and help mitigate the impending disruption.3 It is the- orized that MGI will not be as effective as  SPI  on  ITER, or other large tokamaks, because of the limita- tions of flow dynamics on gas flow into the torus and poor penetration into the plasma.4 The geometry of the tokamak causes the gas to spread around the plasma periphery instead of penetrating deeply inward toward  the core of the plasma, which results in lower assim-
ilation and slower response times than the SPI technique.5
Reliably launching DM pellets of pure neon and/or argon formed in a pipe gun has proven to be a difficult task.2 The breakaway pressures needed to dislodge these pellets are too high to be achieved using fast gas valves. An electrothermal plasma source is an alternative method to generate large pressures behind DM pellets and is capable of producing gas temperatures and pressures upward of 20 000°C and 10 s of MPa within the volume of the source. This paper will focus on experiments performed with an electrothermal source firing Lexan™ pellets as a surrogate for cryogenic DM pellets. A com- parison of the fast gas valve to the ET source with respect to pellet kinetic energy, energy efficiency, and differences in implementation will be discussed.
II.AN ELECTROTHERMAL PLASMA SOURCE AS A PELLET INJECTOR
In the past, electrothermal plasma sources have been used in a vast number of research areas such as ignition sources for electrothermal chemical weapons,6–8 satellite thrusters,9 and high-heat-flux sources for materials applications.10,11 The electrothermal plasma source operates in the ablative arc regime driven by a direct-current (dc) capacitive discharge. The arc is initiated across a three- electrode spark gap using a 30-kV trigger pulse. An electrothermal plasma source contains five main com- ponents: the feedthrough, the source liner, the insulator,   a high density polyethylene (HDPE) cover, and the ground housing. The feedthrough acts as the electrode  for the discharge. A portion of the feedthrough  is inserted into the source liner, directing the arc through  the liner to the ground housing, which is the zero- potential point of the circuit. The insulator acts to
completely insulate the feedthrough from the ground housing. The HDPE cover is bolted directly to the vacuum chamber and acts as a vacuum seal as it compresses O-rings contained within the source.
Figure 1 shows an image of a typical electrothermal source, not including the O-rings. The top image is an assembled source, and the bottom image shows the  source in an expanded view.  The liner shown in Fig. 1    is a boron nitride liner. Source liners can be any noncon- ducting material that is subject to ablation by joule heat- ing. Alternate designs have been engineered to accommodate conducting materials, but  those  designs are not relevant to this work.
An electrothermal source cannot operate in a high vacuum. A gas pressure is required to initiate breakdown through the bore of the source. Like most dc plasma sources, the electrothermal source exhibits breakdown curves that follow the same trends as Paschen’s Law.12 The optimal operating pressure for these experiments is
~10 Torr. The system is pumped down to approximately 10 mTorr and then backfilled with helium just before the discharge is triggered. As the current travels through the bore of the source liner, it ablates liner material due to joule heating and simultaneously heats the fill gas.
Figure 2 shows a general schematic of an electro- thermal system. The input of heat via ohmic heating generates a large pressure within the source,  on  the  order of 10 s of MPa. The source liners, in this set of experiments, are 105 mm  long  with  a  bore  diameter  of 4 mm.
The high pressures generated in an electrothermal source are hypothesized to be able to launch projectiles  at high speeds.14 In this work, a variation on the electro- thermal source was designed as a pellet launching system. The ground housing is fitted with tapped holes that allow
Fig. 1. (Top) Image of an assembled electrothermal source without the polycarbonate cover. (Bottom) Image of an expanded electrothermal source with labels for the main components.
Fig. 2. General schematic of a basic electrothermal system. The schematic shows the basic premise of the electrical system along with the source components and the arc path through the capillary.13
a barrel to be tightly attached to the front face of the source. A cylindrical Lexan (polycarbonate) pellet 10 mm in diameter and 15 mm in length fits tightly within the barrel approximately 10 mm from the exit of the source. Figure 3 shows an image of the barrel attached to the front of the ground housing along with a typical Lexan pellet. The Lexan pellets have a density of 1.2 g/cm3 and an average mass of 1.18 g, similar to typical cryogenic DM pellets. It was not feasible to test the electrothermal source with real DM pellets as interfacing with the necessary cryo- genic systems was outside the scope of this work. The barrel is a 28-cm-long, Type 304 stainless steel tube with an inner diameter of 10.1 mm. A 1.3-cm-thick, 3.8-cm-diameter base is welded to the barrel to act as a connection point to the source ground housing. The base has a 10.1-mm hole bored
in the center to mate to the barrel.
Pellets are loaded into place by manually pushing them through the exit of the barrel with a flexible rod. The pellets fit tightly within the barrel to minimize the amount of gas that blows by the pellet. Once a pellet is loaded, the chamber is closed and pumped down to ~10 mTorr. The discharge circuit can produce a variety of pulse lengths based on the installed pulse forming network (PFN). This work examined cases with an ~1-ms pulse length and
Fig. 3. An image of an electrothermal ground housing modified to accommodate fastening a pellet acceleration barrel to the downstream end. The image also shows a Lexan pellet (10-mm diameter, 15-mm length).
an ~150-µs pulse length. The 1-ms pulse is created with a PFN that consists of a 100-µH inductor and 1-Ω resistor. The 150-µs pulse is the nominal pulse width of the system with no pulse shaping. Along with varying the electrical characteristics of the system, various liner materials were also tested. The main outputs from a pellet shot are source current, source voltage, high-speed imaging of the pellet leaving the barrel, and the signal received from a shock accelerometer attached to a flange downstream of the barrel exit. These diagnostic outputs provide data to calculate input power to the source and the speed of the pellet. The distance between the end of the barrel and the downstream flange was 0.27 m.
III.LAUNCHING PELLETS WITH A LIGHT GAS GUN
A light gas gun using a fast opening gas valve is a standard method used for launching fueling, edge-localized- mode pacing, or DM pellets.2,15,16 The present plans for the SPI DM system on ITER call for a set of four-barrel pipe guns that launch 13- to 28-mm-diameter pellets of deuterium, neon, argon, or a mixture of these gasses. The pipe-gun style DM pellet launcher utilizes the process of cryodesublimation to form a pellet within the barrel. The pellet is then launched using a custom power supply that provides a current pulse to the valve with a duration on the order of 1 to 2 ms. The valve opens to provide a high-pressure pulse of gas to the rear of the pellet, delivering enough force to break the pellet away from the wall and accelerate it downstream.
A series of shots conducted with 10-mm D2-Ne pel- lets was used to generate data for comparison with shots conducted with the electrothermal source. Figure 4 shows the barrel and cryostat used in the pipe-gun shots. The barrel is 1.5 m long in this particular experimental setup. A cryocooler is used to cool the copper cryostat on the
Fig. 4.  An image of the barrel used to form and accelerate 10-mm cryogenic pellets.
barrel to approximately 8.5 K, below the triple point temperatures of both deuterium  (18.6  K)  and  neon (24.6 K). A predetermined amount of deuterium and  neon gas is slowly added to the volume containing the cryostat, and the pellet is subsequently formed. Pellets are launched by pressurizing the fast gas valve to between
4.0 and 7.0 MPa, depending on application or design requirements. Pellet speeds are measured using a high- speed camera that views the pellet exiting a guide tube and impacting a shock plate 0.45 m downstream.
IV.PELLET LAUNCHING RESULTS AND COMPARISON
When conducting experiments to determine the perfor- mance of the electrothermal source launching pellets, var- ious parameters were changed to determine the optimal combination to achieve faster pellet speeds. Two different liner materials were used along with two pulse lengths. The first phase of testing was done using boron nitride (hexago- nal structure) as the liner material with a 1-ms pulse length. Boron nitride is a soft brittle material and failed to withstand the pressure generated within the source for all six shots that were attempted. Boron nitride was the first-choice material because small quantities of boron and nitrogen are viewed as fusion plasma compatible. The pellet velocities produced with a boron nitride liner and a 1-ms pulse were, on average, 100 m/s because of the liner shattering. Boron nitride shots will not be included in any further analysis owing to their consistent mechanical failure and resulting low pellet speed. Lexan was the second liner material type tested. Lexan is well known to handle the stress of high-pressure electro- thermal discharges.
Figure 5 shows the typical voltage and current traces
delivered to the source for the 1-ms pulse, along with the downstream shock sensor output. These specific data come from pellet shot 6 through a Lexan liner. The pellet speed for this particular shot was 430 m/s. Figure 6 shows an image of
Fig. 5. Current and voltage traces delivered to the elec- trothermal source over 1 ms for pellet shot 6. The plot also displays the saturated downstream shock sensor output.
the pellet exiting the barrel at 1.34 ms from the time of the trigger. The second pulse length, 150 µs, is the intrinsic pulse length with no pulse shaping components in series. Figure 7 shows the typical voltage and current traces deliv- ered to the source for the 150-µs pulse, along with the downstream shock sensor output. The resulting pellet speed for the shot shown in Fig. 6, shot 12, is 779 m/s. Figure 8 shows the pellet from shot 12 exiting the barrel
0.78 ms after the trigger. Pellet speeds are calculated using the distance from the exit of the barrel to the target plate divided by the difference in time between the pellet exiting the barrel and hitting the downstream plate. There is no way to measure when the pellet starts accelerating within the barrel, so the barrel exit to the target plate is the most accurate measure of speed.
The pellets launched with the light gas gun are a 50-50 mixture of deuterium and neon formed by combin- ing approximately 600 Torr·l of each gas in a vessel separate from the volume that contains the barrel’s
Fig. 6. An image of the pellet exiting the barrel during shot 6. The intense light produced in an electrothermal discharge makes it difficult to see the pellet, so it is outlined in black. This image was taken 1.34 ms after   the source was triggered.
Fig. 7. Current and voltage traces delivered to the elec- trothermal source over 150 µs for pellet shot 12. The plot also displays the saturated downstream shock sensor output.
Fig. 8. An image of the pellet exiting the barrel during shot 12 shows the pellet is shrouded in gas, which makes it difficult to see, so it is outlined in white. This image was taken 0.0778 ms after the source was triggered.
neon and deuterium) resulted in pellets with a length- over-diameter ratio of 1.37 and an approximate mass of
0.77 g. The pellets launched with the electrothermal source  have  a  density  of  1.2  g/cm3  and  a  mass  of
1.18 g; thus, the mass of the mixed gas pellets is 35%  less than the Lexan pellets launched with the electrother- mal source. The mass of the pellet has a significant influence on the resulting speed of the pellet; as the pellet mass increases, the resulting speed decreases. The pellet speed is limited by the sound speed of the propellant gas, as shown by gas gun theory.17 Multiple shots were con- ducted with the light gas gun for two different propellant gases: helium and hydrogen.
Figure 9 shows an image of a 50-50 deuterium-neon pellet exiting the guide tube and traveling toward the downstream plate. This pellet was launched with hydro- gen gas at 5.9 MPa. The resulting speed was 616 m/s.
Pellets launched with the electrothermal source have a range of speeds depending on the magnitude of the input current. Table I shows the data for electrothermal shots
freezing zone. Once the gas is mixed, a gate valve is opened allowing the gas to flow to the freezing zone.   The size of the pellet can be calculated using the amount of material frozen into the pellet. A known volume with a known pressure drop allows for an accurate mass of frozen material to be calculated. The diameter of the freezing zone remains constant, so a length can easily    be inferred. This combination of gas (600 Torr·l of both
Fig. 9. An image of pipe-gun shot 443. The image shows a pellet exiting the guide tube at 616 m/s (traveling from right to left) before impacting the downstream shock plate.
TABLE I
Compilation of Data Showing Electrothermal Pellet Shots and Their Corresponding Pulse Width, Current Amplitude, and Resulting Pellet Speed conducted with Lexan liner material. In Table I, shot num- bers are listed with corresponding current amplitudes and resulting velocities. The pellets fired with an ~20-kA, 150-µs pulse travel significantly faster than those fired with an ~3-kA, 1-ms pulse. Table II displays data for six mixed gas pellets accelerated with the gas gun. Three of these shots were fired using hydrogen propellant gas, and three were fired using helium. Comparing these shots to the electrothermal shots, one can see that the electrothermal source, at higher current amplitudes, is able to launch the pellets at a higher speed than the light gas gun.
V.SYSTEM ENERGY COMPARISON
Although the systems have different methods of storing potential energy and converting it to kinetic energy of the pellet, efficiencies can still be compared. A Lexan pellet traveling 476 m/s (electrothermal shot 7) has a kinetic energy of 133 J. A mixed gas pellet traveling 574 m/s (gas gun shot
445) has  a kinetic  energy  of 128 J. The large  difference in TABLE II
Compilation of Data Showing the Propellant Gas Pressures, Gas Types, and Resulting Speeds for Several 50-50 Deuterium- Neon Mixtures Formed and Launched Using a Light Gas Gun
speed is accounted for by the large difference in mass. A simple energy analysis will help determine which system is more efficient at transferring stored energy to pellet kinetic energy. Each system has an assortment of energy loss mechanisms and different engineering challenges to over- come when being applied to launching DM pellets. The electrothermal source needs enough potential across the source electrodes to enable electrical breakdown, and both methods need to generate enough pressure to break a pellet away from the wall after the formation process.
The energy storage mechanism within the electro- thermal system is a 10-kV, 355-µF capacitor. Energy is stored until a trigger is sent to a 30-kV pulse generator that initiates a spark across a three-electrode spark gap. Once the spark gap is triggered, the potential is applied to the electrode of the source. If this potential is large enough, the source gas breaks down into a plasma, and    a current is induced through the source. This current ablates liner material and dissociates any molecular spe- cies through various heating mechanisms. The heating and ablation processes are mechanisms for energy loss. Equation (1) shows a simplified energy equation from an overall system perspective:
@1
where
Ecap,i = initial energy stored on the capacitor
Ecap,f = energy stored on the capacitor after the shot is conducted, as not all of the energy leaves the capacitor during discharge
EPFN = energy dissipated within the PFN  and any power transmission lines; when operating electrothermal shots with a pulse length of 1 ms, a significant amount of energy is dissipated  within the discharge resistor
EHeating = energy dissipated within the source
EGas Loss = energy lost through expansion and cool- ing of the gas, along with the gas that escapes around the pellet
EPellet = resulting kinetic energy of the pellet.
The energy that is delivered to the source is calculated by integrating the power curve for each shot. Current and voltage traces are multiplied together to determine the power delivery over the duration of the discharge.
Table III shows the energy values that are of most interest for the comparison of pellet launching efficien- cies. The second column shows the amount of energy that was discharged from the capacitor, Ecap,i − Ecap,f.
Table III also shows the energy delivered to the source, the kinetic energy of the pellet, the fraction of the capa- citor energy that is delivered to the source, the fraction of the capacitor energy that is transferred to the pellet, and the fraction of the energy delivered to the source that is transferred to the pellet. In the case of shots with a 1-ms pulse duration, the fraction of capacitor energy delivered to the source is much lower than the 150-µs pulse owing to the large amount of energy that is dissipated by the PFN. The main parameter for comparison is the fraction of source energy transferred to the pellet. For the electro- thermal source the fraction of source energy is about 5% for the 1-ms pulse and 9.6% for the 150-µs pulse.
The light gas gun stores its initial energy in the form of pressurized gas in a 300-cm3 volume. The valve body and tubing add volume, so for calculation purposes it is estimated that the volume is ~315 cm3. The fast valve is opened for 1.5 ms for all the shots discussed in this work. The opening of the valve allows gas to flow through the seat into the breach of the pipe gun. Not all the gas leaves the 315-cm3 volume upstream of the valve. Like the electrothermal source, not all the initial stored energy is delivered to the gun. The flow through the orifice and blow-by around the pellet are the main two energy loss mechanisms. Equation (2) shows a simplified energy equation for the overall gas gun system:@2
where
EStored,i = initial stored energy in the 315-cm3 volume
EStored,f = final stored energy
EOrificeFlow
= energy loss of the gas while it flows through the orifice
EGasFlow = other gas flow losses
EPellet = energy of the pellet.
Table IV shows the amount of energy delivered to the source, the pellet energy, and the fraction of delivered energy translated to pellet energy. The term EDelivered denotes the amount of energy delivered to the source, which is the EStored,i − EStored,f difference. Unlike the electrothermal source, much of the energy  that  leaves the reservoir is delivered to the breech of the gas gun.  The percentage of delivered energy to the pellet is, on average, about 33%. This number is much higher than the
TABLE III
Energy Values and Fraction of Energy Transferred Through the Electrothermal System for Various Shots
TABLE IV
Energy Values and Fraction of Energy Transferred Through the Gas Gun System for Various Shots
efficiency of the electrothermal source, even though the pellet energies are generally lower.
VI.IMPLEMENTATION COMPARISON
There are many engineering challenges associated with implementing either of these systems on a fusion machine for DM purposes. The main challenge associated with the gas gun system for launching DM pellets is achieving a sufficiently high breakaway pressure to dislodge the pellets from the wall. Launching pellets of pure neon and argon has proven to be difficult owing to the high strength of the cryogenic material. The delivery of pellet material needs to be reliable to ensure the safety of machine components. For machines like ITER, DM is imperative because the energy dumped from the plasma to plasma-facing compo- nents is very large and can be damaging.
The electrothermal source requires a small input gas pressure to achieve breakdown and can reach very high pressures due to the large amount of energy added to the gas within the source. Since the electrothermal source requires a gas pressure above 10 mTorr, a gas puffing system would need to be put in place and tested for future implementation. This gas load would be handled by pumping on a gap in the guide tube, at the exit of the barrel. This is harder to achieve with a conventional gas gun because of the much larger gas loads needed to fire pellets. Numerous guide tube gaps are needed, along with multiple pumps. Other challenges asso- ciated with implementing the electrothermal source are the thermal loads on the pellet from the plasma and finding a liner material that does not contain impurity material that is for- bidden in the plasma chamber. Sabots have previously been used, for many applications, to protect sensitive projectiles from propellant heat loads. This technique could be used to protect a cryogenic DM pellet from electrothermal plasma impingement. Since boron nitride is too brittle and is not able to withstand the pressures generated within an electrothermal
source, a new  liner  of  suitable  material  must  be  found.  A candidate liner material must be relatively resistant to ablation at low discharge currents (<5 kA). Ablation of an electrothermal source liner is directly related to current ampli- tude and heat of sublimation of the liner material. This must be considered for degradation analysis of the liner material over its lifetime, as consistent maintenance will not be possi- ble when implemented on a tokamak.
Operational parameters such as response time and the effect of a magnetic field will be important for implementa- tion on a future reactor such as ITER. Downstream free flight of the pellet is not dependent upon the acceleration method, whether it be a light gas gun or an electrothermal source. Both systems are capable of responding very quickly to a trigger. No data were gathered in this work to determine which system accelerated pellets faster. Further experimentation would need to be conducted with the electrothermal source in a large magnetic field at various orientations to determine the feasibility of future implementation on a tokamak.
VII.CONCLUSION
Although light gas gun technology is well tested and proven to be effective for launching pellets, the challenge of launching pure argon and neon is still being explored. The electrothermal source provides a potential method for launching argon and neon pellets. Further research and design are needed to determine whether implementing the electrothermal source in a real-world DM system is practi- cal. The electrothermal source was found to launch pellets of similar size (10-mm diameter, 15-mm length) and mass (~1 g) to speeds greater than the light gas gun. The electro- thermal system stores much more energy in its capacitors than the gas gun system stores in compressed gas. This explains the faster speeds and higher pellet kinetic energies seen with the Lexan pellets launched with the electrother- mal source. The energy transferal efficiency to the pellet
from the stored energy is much higher for the gas gun (~35%). The electrothermal source uses much of its stored energy to form and heat the resulting plasma; therefore, the energy transmittal to the pellet is very low (5% for the 1-ms pulse and 9.6% for the 150-µs pulse). The main point of this work was to determine whether launching pellets with the electrothermal system is a worthy endeavor for DM sys- tems. Additional work is needed to determine the pressure limits of the electrothermal source, and those limits must be compared to the breakaway strength of pellets used for DM. The electrothermal source would also need to be investi- gated for compatibility with a fusion burning plasma envir- onment where ambient high magnetic fields and material erosion of the liner must be considered.
Acknowledgments
This research was sponsored by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, managed by UT-Battelle, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy.
