<title>GEANT4 simulation in proton medical imaging: A transport models comparison</title>
<Affiliation>a Pelé Pequeno Príncipe Research Institute (IPPPP), Av. Silva Jardim, 1632, Água Verde, Curitiba, PR, 80250-060, Brazil
b National Science Center ‘Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology’ (NSC KIPT), Akademicheskaya 1, Kharkiv, 61108, Ukraine
c University of Cagliari, Department of Physics and National Institute for Nuclear Physics (INFN), Section of Cagliari, Complesso Universitario di Monserrato - S.P.
Monserrato, per Sestu Km 0.700, 09042 Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy
d Federal University of Technology, Paraná, (UTFPR), Av. Sete de Setembro, 3165, Rebouças, Curitiba, PR, 80230-90, Brazil</Affiliation>
<author>A. Ray , R. Prasad , C.A. Betty , T.V. Chandrasekhar Rao </author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2020.108814</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2020.108814  </URL>
ABSTRACT
Imaging techniques using protons are currently being actively developed for proton therapy. Presently, many researchers use the GEANT4 toolkit to simulate proton imaging devices, without, however, detailed analysis of its precision for the case of thick absorbers. In this paper we present a systematic comparison of the quantities important for proton imaging as simulated by different physics lists of GEANT4 (version 9.6.p03) in the con- ditions close to those of proton medical imaging. We evaluated the physics lists FTF_BIC_EMY, FTFP_BERT_EMY, QGSP_BERT_95_EMY, QGSP_BERT_EMY, QGSP_BIC_EMV, and QGSP_BIC_EMY. The kinetic energies, angles, and coordinates of protons exiting the absorber were analysed. The significant differences in the phy- sical observables were detected between EMY and EMV models of electromagnetic processes. The dif- ference between BERT and BIC models of nuclear processes is at least 10 times smaller. The obtained results may be used not only in proton imaging but also as a test for nuclear models in future experiments with thick absorbers.
Keywords:
Proton medical imaging GEANT4
Physics lists
1.Introduction
Much attention is paid nowadays to proton imaging techniques, discovered experimentally about 50 years ago (Koehler, 1968; Steward and Koehler, 1973). The modern interest in proton radiology and proton computed tomography is caused by needs of proton therapy (Sadrozinski et al., 2016; Cirrone et al., 2007; Taylor et al., 2015). They deal with relatively thick objects, like the human head or trunk, where protons lose a significant part of their energy, but have sufficient energy to exit it. The physical quantities important in proton imaging are the kinetic energy, angle, and coordinates of protons exiting the object.
Geant4 is a comprehensive Monte Carlo toolkit written to simulate the passage of ionizing particles through matter (Agostinelli et al., 2003; Allison et al., 2006, 2016). In recent years, it has been increas- ingly used to simulate proton imaging devices (Giacometti et al., 2017; Price, 2016), without, however, detailed analysis of its accuracy in the case of thick absorbers. The information available in literature is lim- ited to cases involving very thin absorbers. The differences observed in such studies are practically undetectable experimentally, however they may lead to significant disagreements in exit spectra when integrated
along proton trajectories in thick absorbers. Another validation was performed for extremely large absorbers, in which the protons are completely stopped (see for example Zacharatou Jarlskog and Paganetti, 2008; Pia et al., 2010). The focus of such studies was on energy loss at the Bragg peak and the physical quantities important in proton imaging were not studied. Our analysis of the exit energy spectra in the region of a few dozens of MeV has shown the significant differ- ence between simulation and experiment (Hoff et al., 2017; Silva et al., 2019).
The results presented in this paper describe a systematic and de- tailed comparison of the quantities important for proton imaging (exit energy, displacement and angle) as simulated by different physics lists of GEANT4, version 9.6.p03. Comparison was performed in the range of initial energies between a few and a few hundred MeV. Initially, we planned to study only those parts of the exit spectra that are used in proton imaging and for which electromagnetic processes are re- sponsible. However, it became possible to analyse another part of the exit spectra that is dominated by nuclear interactions. Thus, the ob- tained results may also be used as a test for nuclear models in future experiments with thick absorbers.
Table 1
GEANT4 classes implemented in physics lists.
Table 2
FRITIOF (FTF), Quark-gluon string (QGS), Bertin cascade (BERT) and Binary cascade (BIC). The G4PreCompoundModel class (referred as P) was evoked for some cases, because it makes possible to extend the energy interval of kinematical models of nucleon-nucleon inelastic collision, performing a smooth transition between the kinetic and the equilibrium stages. FTF and QGS are high energy models which are applied to energies above the maximum energy used in the present study. They were evoked to complete the energy range available in Geant4 and to avoid any additional inconsistency.
Among the existing physics lists, QGSP_BIC_EMY stands out for being used in the Hadrontherapy application, built in GEANT4 (Cirrone et al., 2011) to meet the needs of proton therapy. The results obtained with this physics list were used as a reference point for our comparisons of exit energy, displacement and angular distributions. More details about the Geant4 processes and models as well as the important para- meters selected for this study can be found in Hoff et al. (2017).
The virtual world of the simulation was composed of vacuum, ac- cording to the composition of G4Galactic, and a water slab (absorber). The primary generator action was defined as a point source, emitting monochromatic protons normally to the entrance surface of the ab- sorber (Fig. 1). For every proton that left the absorber (exit protons),
Proton initial energy and absorber thickness.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.Simulation conditions
We evaluated physical processes and models named as  “standard physics” implemented in the physics lists FTF_BIC_EMY, FTFP_BERT_EMY,	QGSP_BERT_95_EMY,	QGSP_BERT_EMY,
QGSP_BIC_EMV, and QGSP_BIC_EMY (Table 1). The G4Em- StandardPhysics_option3 class (EMY) is recommended to any applica- tion that requires high accuracy level for electrons, hadrons and ions transportation. To evaluate the influence of the electromagnetic pro- cesses on the results, this class was replaced by the G4Em- StandardPhysics class (EMV). The hadronic processes for protons were:FRITIOF (FTF), Quark-gluon string (QGS), Bertin cascade (BERT) and Binary cascade (BIC). The G4PreCompoundModel class (referred as P) was evoked for some cases, because it makes possible to extend the energy interval of kinematical models of nucleon-nucleon inelastic collision, performing a smooth transition between the kinetic and the equilibrium stages. FTF and QGS are high energy models which are applied to energies above the maximum energy used in the present study. They were evoked to complete the energy range available in Geant4 and to avoid any additional inconsistency.
Among the existing physics lists, QGSP_BIC_EMY stands out for being used in the Hadrontherapy application, built in GEANT4 (Cirrone et al., 2011) to meet the needs of proton therapy. The results obtained with this physics list were used as a reference point for our comparisons of exit energy, displacement and angular distributions. More details about the Geant4 processes and models as well as the important para- meters selected for this study can be found in Hoff et al. (2017).
The virtual world of the simulation was composed of vacuum, ac- cording to the composition of G4Galactic, and a water slab (absorber). The primary generator action was defined as a point source, emitting monochromatic protons normally to the entrance surface of the ab- sorber (Fig. 1). For every proton that left the absorber (exit protons),the following information was recorded: pre-step position X, Y and Z (incm); post-step position X, Y and Z; kinetic energy; event identification; particle name; and process name.Comparison between the different physics lists was performed in the range of initial energies between a few and a few hundred MeV. The
“high energy” region (Table 2) includes energies that are currently planned for future use in medical proton imaging. When the thickness of the absorber is sufficient to reduce the energy of a few hundred-MeV
proton to a few MeV (end of range region), the existing analytical formulas are ineffective. The “low energy” region was chosen for a detailed test of proton characteristics in this region. The region of a few dozens of MeV (“intermediate energy”) was tested because of the lack of experimental data in the “high energy” region. The energies in the “intermediate energy” and “low energy” regions were 10 and 100 times smaller, respectively, than those of the “high energy” region.
In the “high energy” region, a 20 cm thickness was chosen for the absorber. Such a thickness, and water as the material, are the typical characteristics of phantoms in modern studies of proton imaging  sys- tems and can represent the human  head.  The  absorber  thicknesses  in the “intermediate energy” and “low energy” regions were chosen ac- cording to the “reduced calibration method” (Yevseyeva et al., 2011), which allows comparison of exit energies for different initial energies. According to this method, the particle range at the exit in the units of its initial range depends only on the exit energy in the units of initial en- ergy. It means that energy-range dependence presented in  the  form of  the ratio between the exit  and initial values  does not depend  either on  the initial energy or the material of the absorber. We used the proton ranges of the PSTAR database of the NIST (National Institute of Stan- dards and Technology) calculated in the Continuous-Slowing-Down approximation (CSDA).
Table 3Percentage of protons that crossed the target.
Table 4
Peak position in the exit energy distribution. (MeV).
2.2.Exit energy
In proton imaging, density resolution (contrast) depends on the position of the maximum of the exit energy distribution, which is here interpreted as the exit energy, and the width of this distribution which
(Sadrozinski et al., 2013). With 107 protons used in this study, the difference between the Gaussian function and the peak form is sig- nificant, which made it impossible to apply this method. To determine the peak energy, we used only the points with frequencies higher than 90% of the peak frequency. This approach gave reasonable chi-square
influences uncertainty in the definition of the exit energy.
(χ2 ) values in all fits. To determine the distribution width, we tried to
The basic method for determining these parameters is to fit a Gaussian function to the central and high energy part of the peak of the distribution to avoid protons from inelastic nuclear processes
red
fit the Gaussian function to the high energy part of the peak with known peak energy. This method also did not give good results.
To compare the peak's forms and widths, we constructed the ratios
Fig. 2. Exit energy spectra for the QGSP_BIC_EMV and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit energy spectrum for the QGSP_BIC_EMV physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
Fig. 3. Exit energy spectra for the QGSP_BIC_EMV and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit energy spectrum for the QGSP_BIC_EMV physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
(R) between the energy distribution of the chosen physics list and that of QGSP_BIC_EMY. The ratios were presented as a function of the dif- ference (ΔE) between the proton exit energy and the corresponding peak energy obtained with the described above method. This method allows us also to analyse the low energy part of the distributions where inelastic nuclear processes are dominant.
Such an analysis allowed determination of the exit energy (ΔEat-nuc) at which nuclear processes become to affect peak produced by atomic processes. In proton medical imaging, this information is important for determination of peak maximum. Within the interval ± ΔEat-nuc, it can be calculated as mean value instead of Gaussian fitting which is much more difficult and time-consuming.
2.3.Exit displacement and angle
In modern prototypes of proton imaging devices, particle exit dis- placement and angle are the characteristics that define its trajectory which is used to improve image spatial resolution. The displacement and angular distributions consist of Gaussian function describing mul- tiple Coulomb scattering placed on the significantly lower and wider “pedestal” describing inelastic nuclear processes. Because these dis- tributions are symmetric with respect to the initial beam axis, the main interest was in their width. To make a quantitative analysis, we ap- proximated the elastic peak by a Gaussian function and the inelastic background by a constant, which allowed an accuracy in width of 0.1–0.2% to be achieved. As in the case of exit energy, a direct com- parison was also made by constructing ratios between the distribution
of the chosen physics list and that of the list QGSP_BIC_EMY. This comparison allowed evaluation of the displacement (Xel-inel) and angle (Θel-inel) at which inelastic nuclear processes begin to affect peak pro- duced by multiple Coulomb scattering. This information is important in modern proton imaging because the formulas used for trajectory re- construction consider only multiple Coulomb scattering and appro- priate cuts should be made in exit spectra.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Number of protons that passed through the target volume
Considering the percentage of protons that passed through the target volume in the “high energy” region, the physics lists may be divided into two groups; the first consists of FTF_BIC_EMY, QGSP_BIC_EMV, and QGSP_BIC_EMY; and the second of FTFP_BERT_EMY, QGSP_BERT_95_EMY, and QGSP_BERT_EMY
(Table 3). It is clear that this division corresponds to the nuclear models BIC and BERT. The differences between the two groups does not exceed 2%, while among the physics lists of the same group the difference does not exceed 0.4%. The BERT model offers a greater number of high energy protons able to exit the target.
For the “intermediate energy” region, the division into two groups according to nuclear model is not so clear. At the energies 20, 25 and 30 MeV, a difference between the group consisting of FTF_BIC_EMY and QGSP_BIC_EMY and that consisting of FTFP_BERT_EMY and QGSP_BERT_EMY is evident. The difference between the groups does
Fig. 4. Exit energy spectra for the QGSP_BERT_EMY and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit energy spectrum for the QGSP_BERT_EMY physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
not exceed 0.07% and is smaller than 0.007% within the group. However, at 18 MeV the difference between the groups decreases and becomes insignificantly small. The physics lists QGSP_BIC_EMV and QGSP_BERT_95_EMY cannot be assigned to any group because their results are sometimes close to one of the groups and sometimes are different to both groups.
When the initial energy decreases even more (the “low energy” region), the number of protons that pass through the target no longer depends on the nuclear models but is exclusively linked to electro- magnetic processes. The difference between EMY and EMV does not exceed 1.5% and was not detected at the energy 2.0 MeV.
3.2.Exit energy
A typical exit energy spectrum comprises a high-energy peak pro- duced by atomic processes and a low energy “tail” caused by nuclear processes. When passing from the “high energy” to the “intermediate energy” region, the percentage of protons that underwent nuclear in- teractions decreases. In the “low energy” region this decrease resulted in full equality between FTFP_BERT_EMY and QGSP_BERT_EMY physics lists at all initial energies and FTF_BIC_EMY and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists at 1.8 MeV. In addition, some physics lists had only slight differ- ences in the transport of a few protons that caused almost complete equality of the energy distributions and the ratio spectra. The physics
lists whose energy distributions at least slightly differ from the dis- tributions of QGSP_BIC_EMY are: FTF_BIC_EMY (2.0, 2.5, and 3 MeV), FTFP_BERT_EMY (2.0 MeV), and QGSP_BIC_EMV. This also applies to the exit angle and displacement.
Regarding the energy of the maximum of the distribution, all the physics lists, except QGSP_BIC_EMV, gave practically the same result (Table 4). The possible influence of nuclear processes does not exceed 0.05% while the difference in electromagnetic models can reach a few percent. In the “high energy” region, the difference in the exit energy between EMY and EMV models caused a difference in the proton range of 1–4 mm that is too large for proton medical imaging. An interesting result was observed for 300 MeV.
In contrast to all the other initial energies, QGSP_BIC_EMV gave a smaller value. This result is unexpected since no new electromagnetic or nuclear processes appears between 250 and 300 MeV.
In the “high energy” region, no difference was detected in shape and amplitude of the peak of the distribution between all the physics lists except for QGSP_BIC_EMV. The difference in amplitude between the EMV and EMY models reaches 3% and depends on initial energy. A change in the difference behaviour was observed between 200 and   250 MeV: the peak of the EMV model is higher and narrower for the smaller initial energies, becoming lower and broader for the higher energies (Figs. 2 and 3).
At exit energies where nuclear processes dominate, all physics lists
Fig. 5. Exit energy spectra for the QGSP_BERT_EMY, QGSP_BIC_EMV and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratios of the exit energy spectra for the QGSP_BERT_EMY and QGSP_BIC_EMV physics lists with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
with the BERT model provide a quantity of protons approximately 20% higher, compared to the BIC model, (Fig. 4). Moreover, between 5 and 15 MeV below the distribution peak, the BERT model has some nuclear processes that do not exist in the BIC; such processes resulted in the appearance of a peak in the ratio spectrum, which became more ob- vious with increasing initial energy.
Such differences in atomic and nuclear processes for the EMY vs. EMV and BERT vs. BIC models allowed determination of the exit energy at which nuclear processes become to affect peak produced by atomic processes (Fig. 5). It was found that ΔEat-nuc = 5–5.5 MeV and does not depend on initial energy i.e. on peak width.
In the “intermediate energy” region, the difference in shape and amplitude of the peak of the distribution also was not observed in all physics lists except QGSP_BIC_EMV (Fig. 6). This physics list gives peak narrower and up to 2% higher. Differences between EMV and EMY models are observed not only in the electromagnetic peak, but also in the nuclear reaction region near the peak. This difference decreases with increasing initial energy. The observed in the “high energy” region difference between the BERT and BIC models also exists in the “inter- mediate energy” region but is less pronounced (Fig. 4).
In the “low energy” region, the difference in shape and amplitude of the peak of the distribution is also evident only between EMV and EMY models, and only at the energy of 1.8 MeV (Fig. 7). Similar to the “intermediate energy”, the difference between these models was
observed in the nuclear reaction region near the peak (Fig. 8). The physics lists with the BIC and BERT models gave the same results.
3.3.Exit displacement
For all the physics lists, in the “high energy” region, the shape of displacement distribution of the exit protons above 5% of the maximum is well described with the sum of Gaussian function for multiple Coulomb scattering and a constant for inelastic nuclear processes. For the description of the distribution above 1% of the maximum, such a simple model of inelastic nuclear processes as a constant is not suffi- cient.
Our results show a significant (up to 5%) difference in standard deviation (SD) between EMY and EMV models of electromagnetic processes. The difference between the other models does not exceed 0.5%.
The shape and amplitude of the elastic peak is the same for all the physics lists except QGSP_BIC_EMV which is broader and up to 5% lower (Fig. 9). This difference extends up to 10 SDs and decreases with increasing initial energy.
The difference between BERT and BIC models is significant in the part of the spectrum where inelastic nuclear processes are dominant (Fig. 10), and increases with the initial energy.
Similar to the case of exit energy, the difference in multiple
Fig. 6. Exit energy spectra for the QGSP_BIC_EMV and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit energy spectrum for the QGSP_BIC_EMV physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
Fig. 8. Exit energy spectra for the QGSP_BIC_EMV and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit energy spectrum for the QGSP_BIC_EMV physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
Fig. 7. Exit energy spectra for the QGSP_BIC_EMV and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit energy spectrum for the QGSP_BIC_EMV physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
Coulomb scattering and inelastic nuclear processes of the EMY vs. EMV and the BERT vs. BIC models allowed evaluation of the displacement at which inelastic nuclear processes begin to affect peak produced by multiple Coulomb scattering (Figs. 10 and 11). It was found that for the EMY model Xel-inel ≈ 2 SD and is somewhat larger (≈ 2.5 SD) for the EMV model. In both cases, Xel-inel does not depend on the initial energy. In the “intermediate energy” region, a satisfactory description of the displacement spectra as the sum of a Gaussian function and a constant was obtained only for the points above 10% of the maximum. Furthermore, for the EMV model, such an interpretation failed com- pletely at 25 and 30 MeV; the difference between these spectra and the
Gaussian function is too great.
The difference in standard deviation between all the physics lists except QGSP_BIC_EMV does not exceed 0.5%. In the case of the EMY and EMV models it can reach 4%.
The shape and amplitude of the elastic peak is the same for all the physics lists except QGSP_BIC_EMV, for which it is narrower and up to 60% higher (Fig. 9). The difference between EMY and EMV extends up to 20 SD, and increases with initial energy. Any difference in shape of the spectra of the BERT and BIC models was not detected.
Similarly to the “high energy” region, in the case of low energies, the distributions above 5% of the maximum can be described as a sum of a Gaussian function (multiple Coulomb scattering) and a constant (inelastic nuclear processes). Above 1% of the maximum, the inter- pretation of the inelastic nuclear processes as a constant is not suffi- cient. This result does not change with increasing initial energy.
There is a significant difference (~20%) in the elastic peak widths between the EMY and EMV electromagnetic processes. The difference between other models does not exceed 0.2%.
Elastic peaks are the same for all physics lists except for QGSP_BIC_EMV, which is 15% lower and broader (Fig. 9). The differ- ence between the EMV and EMY models is also significant in the region
Fig. 9. Exit displacement spectra for the QGSP_BIC_EMV and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit displacement spectrum for the QGSP_BIC_EMV physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
where inelastic nuclear processes dominate and extends at least up to 30 SD. No difference was detected between BERT and BIC models.
3.4.Exit angle
In the “high energy” region, the shape of the angular distribution of protons above 5% of the maximum is well-described as the sum of Gaussian function for multiple Coulomb scattering and a constant for inelastic nuclear processes, as in the case of the exit displacement. For a description of the distribution above 1% of the maximum, this simple interpretation of inelastic nuclear processes is not sufficient especially at low initial energies.
The result shows the significant difference in elastic peak widths (~6–7%) between EMY and EMV electromagnetic process models. The difference between the other models does not exceed 0.2%.
The shape and amplitude of the elastic peaks are the same for the all physics lists except EMV. In the case of EMV it is broader, and 10% lower (Fig. 12). This difference extends up to 10 SD. Analysis of the difference in multiple Coulomb scattering and inelastic nuclear pro- cesses between the EMY and EMV models showed that angle where inelastic nuclear processes begin to affect the elastic peak (Fig. 12) is
~3.5 SD and does not depend on the initial energy.
The difference between the BERT and BIC models in the region of inelastic nuclear processes (Fig. 13, θ > 0.1 rad) grows with increase of initial energy. The BERT model gives up to 40% more protons than BIC model.
In the “intermediate energy” region, unlike the exit displacement, the shape of the angular distributions above 5% of the maximum are well-described with the sum of Gaussian-like function and a constant for all the physics lists. Such a simple interpretation of the inelastic nuclear processes for the distributions above 1% of the maximum was not successful.
A significant difference (~10%) in elastic peak widths was observed between the EMY and EMV models. The difference between the other models does not exceed 0.2%.
The shape and amplitude of the elastic peaks are the same for all the physics lists except EMV. In the case of EMV, the peak is broader and up to 30% lower (Fig. 12). The difference between the electromagnetic EMY and EMV models exists not only in the peak region, but just behind it where inelastic nuclear processes dominate and extends to angles of 15 SD. The difference between BERT and BIC models was not detected. In the “low energy” region, the shape of the angular distribution above 10% of the maximum is well-described with the sum of a Gaussian function for multiple Coulomb scattering and a constant for inelastic nuclear processes. Adjustment quality improves with in- creasing initial energy. For a description of the distribution above 5% of the maximum, this simple interpretation of inelastic nuclear processes
as a constant is not sufficient.
The difference in elastic peak widths between EMY and EMV elec- tromagnetic models reaches ~10–15%. The difference between the other models does not exceed 0.3%.
Elastic peaks are equal for all physics lists except QGSP_BIC_EMV. In
Fig. 10. Exit displacement spectra for the QGSP_BERT_EMY and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit displacement spectrum for the QGSP_BERT_EMY physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
the case of the EMV model, the peak is broader and up to 60% lower (Fig. 12). The difference between the electromagnetic EMY and EMV models exists not only in the peak region, but beyond it, where inelastic nuclear processes dominate, and extends at least up to 20 SD. A dif- ference between the BERT and BIC models was not detected.
4.Conclusions
Accuracy in simulation of exit energy is a keystone in the modelling of modern proton imaging devices for medicine. In proton imaging, density resolution (contrast) depends on the exit energy and its un- certainty. Our analysis of the physics lists of Geant4, version 9.6.p03 shows that the possible influence of nuclear models BERT and BIC on exit energy does not exceed 0.05% while the difference between the EMY and EMV models can reach a few percentage points. Under the conditions of proton medical imaging, such differences cause un- certainty in the proton range of 1–4 mm, which is too large according to modern requirements.
For initial energies of hundreds of MeV, the exit energy at which nuclear processes become to affect peak produced by atomic processes are of order of 5–5.5 MeV and does not depend on initial energy i.e. on peak width. Within this interval, the peak maximum can be calculated as mean value instead of Gaussian fitting which is much more difficult and time-consuming.
A qualitative difference between the BERT and BIC models was observed in the region between the electromagnetic and nuclear pro- cesses, i.e. 5–15 MeV below the electromagnetic peak. This difference may be used as a test for nuclear models in future experiments with thick absorbers.
In modern prototypes of proton imaging devices, particle exit dis- placement and angle are the characteristics that define its trajectory which is used to improve image spatial resolution. The difference be- tween the BERT and BIC models in lateral displacement and angle does not exceed 0.5%. For the EMY and EMV models, this difference is much larger, and increases from ~5% to more than 15% with decreasing initial energy.
Fig. 11. Exit displacement spectra for the QGSP_BIC_EMV and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit displacement spectrum for the QGSP_BIC_EMV physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
Our comparison of different physics lists allowed evaluation of the displacement and angle at which inelastic nuclear processes begin to affect peak produced by multiple Coulomb scattering. It was found that for initial energies of hundreds of MeV this displacement is of 2 stan- dard deviations and the angle is of 3.5 standard deviations and these quantities do not depend on the initial energy. This information is important in modern proton imaging because the formulas used for trajectory reconstruction consider only elastic nuclear scattering and appropriate cuts should be made in exit spectra.
Current situation in the field of proton passage through a thick absorber is characterized by a very limited set of experimental data and their complete absence for the energies typical for proton medical imaging. Our study of the physical observables important for proton imaging shows that the difference between the physics lists may be significant. In such a situation, perhaps the best way out is to simulate proton imaging devices with different physics lists and compare. Our study shows where and what order of difference to expect.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
R.C.L. Silva: Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing - original  draft.
V.Denyak: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing
- review & editing. G. Hoff: Methodology, Software, Validation. S.A. Paschuk: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Resources. H.R. Schelin: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing, Visualization.
J.A.P. Setti: Funding acquisition, Resources.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ- ence the work reported in this paper.
Fig. 12. Exit angle spectra for the QGSP_BIC_EMV and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit angle spectrum for the QGSP_BIC_EMV physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
Fig. 13. Exit angle spectra for the QGSP_BERT_EMY and QGSP_BIC_EMY physics lists and ratio of the exit angle spectrum for the QGSP_BERT_EMY physics list with respect to the QGSP_BIC_EMY physics list.
Acknowledgments
This study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001. The authors also would like to thank CNPq, CNEN and Fundação Araucária for financial support.
