<title>Contribution of nuclear energy on new energy systems post Fukushima</title>
<author>Yukitaka Kato</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Affiliation>Center for Research into Innovative Nuclear Energy Systems, Research Laboratory for Nuclear Reactors, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1-N1-22, Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8550, Japan</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2014.07.018</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2014.07.018 </URL>
a b s t r a c t
Nuclear energy contribution on new energy systems post Fukushima was discussed in this study. A new energy transformation concept based on carbon recycling, called the Active Carbon Recycling Energy System, ACRES, was proposed for a zero carbon dioxide emission process. ACRES is driven with con- sumption of primary energy that does not emit carbon dioxide such as nuclear and renewable energies. A smart ironmaking system based on ACRES, iACRES, was also proposed. Carbon monoxide was thermo- dynamically the ﬁrst candidate for recycling carbon media in iACRES because it had higher energy densities than hydrogen and was highly compatible with conventional iron-making process. From a feasibly study of iACRES driven by high-temperature gas reactor had the most availability for conven- tional ironmaking processes in the stand point of energy output rate in comparison with solar energy system. It was expected that nuclear energy could contribution on conventional industrial processes by using ACRES as a new energy system post Fukushima.
Keywords:
Carbon recycling Carbon monoxide
High-temperature gas reactor Ironmaking process
Post Fukushima
1.Introduction
Energy system designs are required to be changed following with social structure. The Great East Japan earthquake and nuclear accident at Fukushima Daiichi Plant of Tokyo Electric Power Com- pany in 11 March, 2011, showed the risk of Japanese energy system. Most of nuclear power plants in Japan were closed, especially all plants were shut-down after operation stops of last plants in Ooi plant in Kansai Electric Power Company in September, 2013. Japa- nese primary energy resources were shifted from nuclear power to natural gas after the disaster even there were some efforts for utilization of renewable energies. Then, the electricity price and carbon dioxide emission per unit in Japan were increased  after 2011.
Energy supply security is important matter for industrial and economical developments of a society. Steep change and instability of the market prices of primary energy sources is causing economic confusion in any ages. Carbon is the most important energy media for manufacturing industry and social life of human being. Carbon supply security is an essential condition for a sustainable society. In Japan, the supply of fossil fuels of primary energy almost depends on import. Energy balance and ﬂow in Japan was shown in Fig. 1 (Minister of Economy 2006). Fig. 1(a) shows the representative present energy ﬂow in Japan based on data in 2004 at which Jap- anese energy consumption ﬂow was almost stable during decade. Enthalpies  of  import  fuel  and  nuclear  power  were  84%  (18.9 1018 J) and 10% (2.5 1018 J), respectively, of the total pri- mary energy corresponding with 723 GW in Japan. However, liq- ueﬁed natural gas (LNG) was imported alternatively for nuclear power after 2011. Then, the historic deﬁcit of the trade balance has been caused by LNG import cost change from 3.5 Trillion JPY in 2010 to 6.0 Tri. JPY in 2012 (Trade statistics of Ministry of Finance of Japan in, 2012). Not only technical availability, but also economical one for the restart of nuclear power plant should be required in future. Fig. 1(b) shows a future energy ﬂow proposed in this study. Nuclear power use for electricity as before 2011 is needed ﬁrstly for economic recovery for Japan. Japan had obligation internationally to follow the IPCC plan after the Kyoto protocol, and is required drastic reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) emission. However, CO2 reduction connects with restriction of usage of carbon resources and causes depression of activity of manufacturing and service industries. In energy usage in Japan, electricity and process heat is shared around 36% and 51% in primary energy base, respectively. Nuclear power usage to process heat becomes more important for the CO2 emission mitigation without economic activity in future. Then, co-establishment of carbon supply security and reduction of
Fig. 1. Energy balance and ﬂow in Japan (a) present, (b) this study proposed future.
CO2 emission is an important subject for a development of a modern society.
A new energy system in which carbon is reused cyclically was discussed. A carbon recycle system has already existed in nature as a natural carbon neutral system. A concept of an Active Carbon Recycling Energy System, ACRES, was proposed against natural carbon recycling energy system (Kato, 2010). CO2 is regenerated artiﬁcially in hydrocarbons consuming a primary energy source with no-CO2 emission, and re-used cyclically in ACRES. ACRES re- cycles carbon, and transform energy without CO2 emission. ACRES can be applicable for iron-making process. The feasibility of smart ironmaking system based on ACRES, iACRES, was discussed ther- modynamically in this paper.
2.Principle of ACRES
A concept of the proposed ACRES is shown in Fig. 2. Carbon dioxide (CO2) with/without water is the ground state of carbon. CO2 is converted into carbon materials by non-fossil primary energy using some chemical technologies (Kusama and et al., 1996). Pro- duced carbon material is useful for co-production process. The carbon materials provide thermal and electricity energies during oxidation into CO2. The carbon materials are capable to be used as raw material for industrial materials. The carbon materials are ease to be stored and transferred under lower compression pressure in comparison with H2. The carbon materials have quite high afﬁnity with common manufacturing industries. If the carbon recycle sys- tem can be established thermally and kinetically, it is expected that the system is diffused easily into conventional industries. Natural carbon recycle energy system has already been existed by plant lives in nature, and an ideal recycle system. However, potential amount of bio-mass is not enough for a modern society. Especially it is less than 10% of all demand of energy in Japan. The natural recycle system is not enough for energy demand in Japan (Kameyama and Kato, 2005). Then, an artiﬁcial active carbon recycle system was proposed as ACRES in this study.
Fig.  2.  Concept of ACRES.
Fig. 3. Exergy ratio (DG/D H) for carbon materials and hydrogen (HHV).
The structure of ACRES consists of three elemental processes of carbon material usage, CO2 recovery and separation, and carbon material regeneration. In the usage process, the carbon material can be used for both heat source and material. CO2 generated from carbon material consumption is recovered by physical and chemi- cal sorptions. Sorbed CO2 in a sorption material is separated ther- mally by a heat input. This process produces high-concentrated CO2. Recovered CO2 is regenerated into carbon material in the regeneration process. The regeneration process is endothermic and need energy input. In ACRES, total energy input at recovery and separation (ES), and regeneration (ER) should be larger than the energy output at the usage process (EU).
@1
ACRES is energy consumption process, then, a discussion of the energy balance of the system is required for the feasibility evalu- ation of the system.
The selection of the recycling carbon material in ACRES is the ﬁrst key point. The recycling material must be a high-quality energy media and compatible with conventional energy consumption processes. The exergy of the material is the main criteria for energy density, and is deﬁned as the ratio between the Gibbs free energy
(DG [kJ/mol]) and reaction enthalpy (DH [kJ/mol]). Fig. 3 shows the
ratios (DG/DH) of some carbon materials (high heating value (HHV) base). Electricity has a ratio of 100%, and the ratios for the selected
carbon materials are higher than that of hydrogen at 82%. Carbon monoxide (CO) and simple carbon have ratios that are close to that of electricity. If a ﬂow-type reactor is used for an ACRES process, a gas medium is suitable. It was concluded that CO was the best gaseous candidate for the recycling carbon material because CO has a higher energy quality and density than hydrogen, and has a high afﬁnity for conventional energy consumption systems such as iron- making and chemical processes.
Simple carbon (C) is also a good material for ACRES, because C has a higher energy quality and density in comparison with other carbon materials and is easily stored and transferred in the solid phase. It is proved thermodynamically that CO and C have higher energy density than H2, and other hydrocarbons. CO is in gas phase, easily transformable and popular energy material for iron-making process. Then, ACRES using CO is expected as a practical process. CO usage, recovery and separation processes are able to be covered by conventional industrial technologies. Development of efﬁcient CO regeneration process is important for the establishment of ACRES.
3.ACRES for ironmaking process
ACRES concept has possibility to be used in conventional in- dustrial processes. Ironmaking process is one of candidates for application because the process is representative process driven by Fig. 4. Structure of Smart Ionmaking process based on ACRES (iACRES).
energy from carbon resources, and releases CO2 of 7% of Japanese total emission amount, then, it has great contribution on Japanese CO2 emission mitigation if a carbon recycling process is established. The potential of ACRES on ironmaking process was discussed as following.
3.1.Smart ironmaking system based on ACRES, iACRES
A smart ironmaking process based on ACRES, iACRES is shown in Fig. 4. An ironmaking process reduces of hematite (iron sesqui- oxide), Fe2O3, into pure iron by consumption of coke and CO and emits CO and CO2 mixture in equilibrium state. A CO2 separation process separates CO2 from the mixture, and some amount of CO2 corresponding with coke input emitted into outer system. Rest amount CO2 in the mixture is recycled with CO. CO is regenerated from CO2  in  a  CO2  reduction process.  Regenerated CO is reused cyclically in the iron making process. Oxygen, which is the
byproduct of CO regeneration, is used also for oxidation of cokes. The CO2 reduction process is driven by non-fossil primary energy. Electricity and thermal energy generated from high temperature gas rector (HTGR) (Fujikawa and et al., 2004) are useful primary energy for iACRES. The potential of HTGR for iACRES is discussed in Section 4.1. Blast furnace requires coke in Fe2O3 reduction process. On the other hand, direct reduction process of Fe2O3 with CO and H2 gasses have previously been demonstrated and commercialized (Bonalde et al., 2005). Then, coke process could be removed from the direct reduction process.
An iron-making process using hydrogen was discussed in a previous work (Murayama et al., 1977). Hematite is employed as the raw material for the process in the following discussion. The reduction of Fe2O3 using hydrogen is an endothermic reaction and requires external heat input.
@2
In contrast, the reduction of Fe2O3 by CO (Eq. (3)) is an exothermic reaction and proceeds spontaneously with self-heating.
Fe2O3  þ  3CO/2Fe þ 3CO2;  DH ¼ —18:4 kJ=mol	(3)
Therefore, reduction using CO is advantageous for the iron- making process in comparison with H2. The reaction is  common  in conventional iron of direct reduction process as mentioned above. ACRES based on CO has a high applicability for such con- ventional processes. The iron-making process with ACRES is fundamentally a zero-CO2-emission process. This process could be a possible route to the reduction of CO2 emissions.
Current ironmaking system depends deeply on blast furnace row coke which is completely imported from foreign countries for Japan. Row coke has already been occupied by limited mining companies. The price of it is quit ﬂuctuant. During 2009 to 2011, its price changes from 138 Euro/ton to 357 Euro/ton (http://
H2OðgÞ / H2ðgÞþ 1=2 O2ðgÞ; DH ¼ þ241:8 kJ=mol	(5)
The temperature dependency of the changes in the enthalpy and Gibbs free energy, i.e., DHi [kJ,mol—1] and DGi [kJ,mol—1], of Eq. (4) for the electrolysis of CO2 and of Eq. (5) for H2O were calculated
using a chemical reaction and the equilibrium software of HSC Chemistry (Ver. 6.12). The electromotive forces, Vi [V] were derived from Eq. (6).
Vi ¼ —DGi;  F ¼ 9:65 × 104 C,mol—1	(6)
, where ni is the mole number of migrated electrons in a reaction, and DGi corresponds to the electrical energy for electrolysis. The electricity consumption ratio for electrolysis, helei, is deﬁned as follows:
hel—i ¼ DGi=DHi	(7)
The values of Vi and hel-i for Eqs. (4) and (5) are shown in Fig. 5.
@3
Therefore, reduction using CO is advantageous for the iron- making process in comparison with H2. The reaction is  common  in conventional iron of direct reduction process as mentioned above. ACRES based on CO has a high applicability for such con- ventional processes. The iron-making process with ACRES is fundamentally a zero-CO2-emission process. This process could be a possible route to the reduction of CO2 emissions.
Current ironmaking system depends deeply on blast furnace row coke which is completely imported from foreign countries for Japan. Row coke has already been occupied by limited mining companies. The price of it is quit ﬂuctuant. During 2009 to 2011, its price changes from 138 Euro/ton to 357 Euro/ton (http://www.steelonthenet.). Instability of coke cost affects serious impact on economical operation of ironmaking industry especially in Japan. Then, alternative primary energy instead of coke should be needed for next generation ironmaking industry in near future. The alternative energy candidate should have large enough amount and supply stability. Nuclear power is the most promised candidate for the primary energy candidate. Especially, high temperature gas reactor (HTGR) is the most suitable energy source for industry, because it produces higher-temperature and quality energy than other type nuclear reactors, and has inherent safety. Because there is small alternative fuel instead of coke for current ironmaking process in Japan, then, ironmaking industry has not had price negotiation power. iACRES is able to introduce alternative energies, including HTGR, nuclear power and renewable energies, to the industry. Then, iACRES is capable to realize that the industry would obtain the negotiation power, and become more economically stable and achieve mitigation of CO2 emission simultaneously.
3.2.CO2 electrolysis for CO regeneration in ACRES
The efﬁcient regeneration of CO is a key technology for ACRES based on CO. CO2 electrolysis is one method for CO regeneration. A solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) (Jensen et al., 2007), in which the reverse operation of a solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) occurs, is a possible device for the electrolysis of CO2 in ACRES. SOECs have been discussed for the production of syngas, which is a mixture of H2 and CO that is generated from H2O and CO2 as following equations.
@4
@5
The temperature dependency of the changes in the enthalpy and Gibbs free energy, i.e., DHi [kJ,mol—1] and DGi [kJ,mol—1], of Eq. (4) for the electrolysis of CO2 and of Eq. (5) for H2O were calculated
using a chemical reaction and the equilibrium software of HSC Chemistry (Ver. 6.12). The electromotive forces, Vi [V] were derived from Eq. (6).
@6
, where ni is the mole number of migrated electrons in a reaction, and DGi corresponds to the electrical energy for electrolysis. The electricity consumption ratio for electrolysis, helei, is deﬁned as follows:
@7
The values of Vi and hel-i for Eqs. (4) and (5) are shown in Fig. 5. At higher temperatures, hel-CO and hel-H2 decrease. This implies that the electrical energy consumption of the electrolysis of CO2 be- comes lower at higher temperatures, similar to H2O. VCO becomes smaller than VH2 at a temperature higher than 820 ○C. This implies that CO2 electrolysis at a higher temperature results in a smaller demand for electrolysis than H2O electrolysis. CO is useful recycling energy media for ACRES.
4.Primary energy for ACRES
4.1.Thermal efﬁciency of power plants for ACRES
iACRES in Fig. 4 needs electricity and heat generated from non- fossil primary energy for CO2 reduction process. Fig. 6 shows theoretical thermal efﬁciency of power plants (Environmental
Fig. 5. Temperature dependency of DG/DH for CO2 and H2O electrolysis (LHV).
temp 25 ○C). The efﬁciency was thermal efﬁciency of ideal cycle driven between the temperature of generated heat from a plant and the environmental temperature. The ideal efﬁciency is different from the actual system efﬁciency because the actual system has no ideal cycle. This ﬁgure shows relative relationship of the ideal po- wer plants, and the relative relationship would be applicable on actual systems. Higher temperature heat output process has higher efﬁciency both nuclear and fossil fuel power plant. High tempera- ture gas reactor (HTGR) which produces heat up to 950 ○C has potentially higher efﬁciency than other reactors of light water reactor, super critical water reactor and sodium cooled fast breeder reactor. An HTGR concept of GTHTR300 was designed for a thermal output of 600 MW-thermal (Kunitomi et al., 2002). High temper- ature heat generated from HTGR is useful for high-temperature CO2 electrolysis at over 700 ○C without CO2 emission. HTGR is one of important candidates for ACRES system.
Fig. 6. Theoretical thermal efﬁciency of power plants (Environmental temp ¼ 25 ○C) (LWR: light water reactor, SCE: super critical water reactor, Na FBR: sodium cooled fast breeder reactor).
Ironmaking processes have variety. Table 1 shows energy de- mands of conventional ironmaking furnaces. A blast furnace is conventional furnace, and produces around 400 t/h of pig iron with consumption of coal of 500 kg/t-pig-ion which correspondents with 1500 MW of enthalpy (Nippon Steel & Sumitomo Metal Corp). A direct reduction furnace consumes natural gas and electricity, and its total energy consumption is around 400  MW (Kawamura  et al., 2006). A cupola for conventional iron-casting process con- sumes around natural gas of 17 MW (Naniwa Roki Co). A packed bed type scrap melting process consumes coke and natural gas of around 1 MW (Yamamoto et al., 1999). Solar photo voltaic (PV) system is becoming popular as an renewable energy of alternative of fossil energy. Megawatt-class solar PV farms are constructing in Japan. One of farms has capacity of 13 MW electricity and needs
0.23 km2 for the facility area (Tokyo Electic Power Comp). HTGR has good scale adaptability of direct reduction iron making process and blast furnace process because of its capacity is around 600 MW- thermal. Solar PV is applicable on Cupola and PSM furnaces from the stand point of power production rate, however, it needs fairly broader area than HTGR. It was expected that HTGR was one of candidates for energy resources for iACRES because it produces thermal energy up to 950 ○C without CO2 emission, and its heat output rate has enough adaptability to conventional ironmaking processes. ACRES concept is also applicable to other industrial chemical process, then, it would be useful to evaluate a potential of ACRES for conventional industry for CO2 emission mitigation.
CO2 reduction technology is the key issue for establishment of iACRES system, however, there are small previous researches for the technology. Solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) for CO2 reduc- tion is thermodynamically-effective methodology; however, SOEC has not been developed enough. SOEC has the similar structure of fuel cell (FC). Even well-developed FC systems have outputs less than 1 MW, however, ironmaking system consumes 1e2 GW per a blast furnace. Electrolysis of CO2 by SOEC for iACRES will need fairly large surface area for cell. SOEC is made from ceramics electrolyte. The electrolyte is difﬁcult to have large surface area because of its vulnerability to thermal and physical shocks. Then, development of SOES which has large surface area of cell is important technical issue.
5.Conclusions
For an establishment of a practical ACRES, selection of recycling carbon material medium and primary energy source for the system drive were important. CO was the most suitable for a recycle
medium in ACRES, because CO had higher energy density than H2. Smart ironmaking process based on ACRES, iACRES, was one of applications of ACRES. HTGR were candidates of primary energy source of iACRES for CO2 reduction into CO by SOEC methodology. ACRES concept is also applicable to other industrial chemical pro- cesses for CO2 emission mitigation by using HTGR and other nu- clear power plants. It was expected that nuclear energy could contribution on conventional industrial processes by using ACRES as a new energy system post Fukushima.
List of symbols
ES [J]	Total energy input at recovery and separation
ER [J]	Total energy input at regeneration
EU [J]	Energy output at the usage process
F	Faraday constant (¼ 9.65 × 104 C,mol—1)
ni [mol] Mole number of migrated electrons in a reaction
Vi [V]	Electromotive forces
DHi [kJ,mol—1] Enthalpy change
DGi[kJ,mol—1] Gibbs free energy change, Electrical energy for electrolysis
helei	Electricity consumption ratio for electrolysis
