<title>Evaluation of neutron nuclear data on platinum isotopes</title>
<author>Keiichi Shibata</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Data Center, Nuclear Science and Engineering Center, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Tokai-mura, Japan</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2016.1223561</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2016.1223561</URL>
ABSTRACT
Neutron nuclear data on 10 isotopes of platinum have been evaluated for the next version of Japanese Evaluated Nuclear Data Library general-purpose file in the energy region from 10−5 eV to 20 MeV. Resolved resonance parameters of naturally occurring isotopes were taken from a com- pilation work, while unresolved resonance parameters were obtained by fitting to the total and capture cross sections calculated from nuclear models. A statistical model code was applied to evaluate cross sections above the resolved resonance region. Compound, pre-equilibrium and direct-reaction processes were considered for cross-section calculation. Coupled-channel optical model parameters were employed for the interaction between neutrons and nuclei. Giant-dipole and pygmy resonance parameters for E1 γ -ray transition from platinum isotopes were determined so as to reproduce measured γ -ray spectrum. The present results reproduce experimental data very well. The evaluated data are compiled into Evaluated Nuclear Data File formatted data files.
KEYWORDS
Neutron nuclear data; evaluation; platinum isotopes; cross section; JENDL; resonance parameter; optical model; statistical model
1.Introduction
Nuclear data are required for nuclear science and engi- neering. Especially, neutron-induced reaction data are important for nuclear energy applications. Japanese Evaluated Nuclear Data Libraries (JENDLs) have been developed by the Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA) since 1977. The fourth version of the general-purpose file,  JENDL-4.0,  was  released  [1]  in  2010.   JENDL-
4.0 contains neutron-induced reaction data for 406 nuclides in the atomic number of Z = 1–100. However, the data for 11 elements have never been evaluated due to the low priority for nuclear energy applications. Plat- inum is an element of which data are missing in JENDL-
4.0. Recently, activation cross sections of various ele- ments have been needed for the decommissioning of nuclear facilities. In addition to major elements, we have to pay attention to minor elements which could be con- tained as impurities in structural materials, since their radioactivity might be high. Hence, the platinum data should be evaluated in order to make JENDL a complete library.
The present work was undertaken to newly evaluate the data on platinum isotopes by considering the lat- est knowledge on experimental and theoretical nuclear physics. Evaluated are the total, elastic and inelastic scattering, (n, γ ), (n, p), (n, d), (n, t), (n, 3He), (n, α), (n,
np), (n, nd), (n, nα), (n, 2n), (n, 3n), (n, 2np) reaction cross sections, the angular distributions of elastically and inelastically scattered neutrons and the energy dis- tributions of emitted particles and γ -rays in the energy region from 10−5 eV to 20 MeV. The Q-values of the reactions were calculated from the mass table AME2012
[2], and are listed in Table 1, together with abundances
[3]and half-lives [4].
The paper presents how the evaluation was per-  formed. Section 2 deals with the resonance region. In Section 3, the computational methods and procedures above the resonance region are described. Comparisons of the evaluated results with the experimental and exist- ing evaluated data are made in Section 4. Finally, Sec- tion 5 summarises the conclusion.
2.Resonance region
The  resolved  and  unresolved  resonance  regions  are listed  in  Table  2  for  each  target  nucleus.  In  princi- ple, resolved resonance parameters (RRPs) are obtained from the analyses of experimental data. RRPs are avail- able  for  190, 192, 194, 195, 196, 198Pt,  although  the  parame- ters  were  quite  old  and  no  new  measurements  have been  reported.  In  the  present  work,  the  RRPs  for these nuclei were taken from the compilation work of Mughabghab [5]. The neutron widths for the negative resonances of 190, 192, 194Pt were adjusted so as to repro- duce the thermal capture cross sections recommended by Mughabghab, while those of 195, 196, 198Pt were mod- ified by considering the data measured by Massarczyk et al. [6] for 195Pt and by Farina Arboccò et al. [7] for 196, 198Pt.  Concerning  189, 191, 193, 197Pt  for  which  RRPs were unavailable, constant and 1/v  energy dependen- cies  were  assumed  for  the  elastic  scattering  and  cap- ture cross sections, respectively. Normalisation of these cross  sections  was  done  at  thermal  energy.  The  ther- mal  scattering  cross  section  was  calculated  as  4π Rj 2, where Rj expresses the scattering radius that can be esti-
Table1. Isotopic abundances and reaction Q-values of platinum isotopes.
Table2. Resolved and unresolved resonance regions.
mated from nuclear model calculations in the higher energy region. On the other hand, the thermal capture cross sections of these nuclei were estimated from a simplified formula used in the preceding work on anti- mony [8]. This formula gives rough estimates of ther- mal capture cross sections by using theoretical s-wave γ -ray strength functions. It is used only when no other options are available.
The unresolved resonance parameters (URPs) were determined with the ASREP code [9] by fitting to the total and capture cross sections evaluated with the nuclear models which will be described in the succeed- ing section. The URPs obtained are used only for self- shielding calculations, since the pointwise cross sec- tions are given in the evaluated data files. As an example, the average cross sections of 197Pt reconstructed from the URPs are compared in Figure 1 with the total and capture cross sections calculated from the nuclear mod- els. In the parameter fitting with the ASREP code, 10% uncertainties in the nuclear model calculations were assumed. The reconstructed cross sections reproduce the nuclear model calculations very well.Figure . Unresolved resonance region for n + Pt.
sections of platinum isotopes. The code is based on the spherical and coupled-channel optical models, the two-component exciton pre-equilibrium model, the distorted-wave Born approximation, and the multi- step statistical model. In order to simulate the direct and semi-direct effects on the radiative capture reac- tion, the pre-equilibrium capture was considered by using the γ -ray emission rate of Akkermans and Grup- pelaar [12] extended to the two-component exciton pre- equilibrium model.
3.2. Parameter determination
... Optical model potentials
As for neutrons, we employed the global optical model parameters obtained by Kunieda et  al.  [13]  using  the coupled-channel method based on the rigid rotor
3.Computational methods and procedures above resonance region
3.1.Nuclear models
The CCONE code (Version 0.8.4) [10,11] was  used for calculating the neutron-induced reaction cross
model [14]. The potential forms are the same  as  those used in the previous work [15]. From the neu- tron potentials, transmission coefficients are obtained together with total cross sections, shape-elastic scatter- ing cross sections, and the direct-reaction components of inelastic scattering cross sections for the CCONE cal- culation. The parameter values are listed in Table 3
Table2. Optical model parameters for neutrons.
and the coupling schemes and deformation parameters are given in Table 4. The deformation parameters for 194, 196, 198Pt were taken from the work of Deason et al. [16], while those for the remaining nuclei were based on the finite-range droplet model (FRDM) [17]. The calculated total cross section of elemental Pt is shown in Figure 2 together with experimental data and the spherical optical model calculations using the param- eters of Koning and Delaroche [18]. In order to give a better fit to the experimental data, the value of W DISP was adjusted, while the rest of the parameters remain unchanged from the original ones [13]. It is found from Figure 2 that the present calculations reproduce the measured data better than those using the parameters of Koning and Delaroche.
Concerning charged particles, we utilised the spher- ical parameters of Koning and Delaroche [18] for pro- tons, those of Lohr and Haeberli [19] for deuterons,
those of Becchetti and Greenlees [20] for tritons and 3He, and those of Avrigeanu et al. [21] for α-particles. The transmission coefficients, which are required by
CCONE to calculate charged-particle emission, were obtained from the charged-particle parameters.
3.2.2.Discrete levels and level density
In the calculation, it was necessary to input the discrete levels and level density parameters for 35 nuclei, i.e. 188 − 199Pt, 188 − 198Ir, and 185 − 196Os. The discrete levels were taken from the reference input parameter library RIPL-3 [22].
Concerning the level density, the composite formula of Gilbert and Cameron [23] was used in the present work. In the region of low excitation energy E, the level density is described by the constant temperature for- mula ρT, namely
@1
where T and E0 are adjustable parameters to fit the for- mula in measured discrete levels. On the other hand, the a parameter, which characterises the Fermi-gas part of level density ρF, is defined as
@2
Table2. Coupling schemes used in the interaction between neutron and target.
Table 3. Level density parameters for each nucleus.
Table4. E parameters for platinum isotopes.
where Esh is the shell correction energy and γ a damping factor. The damping factor is given by γ 0.40A−1/3MeV−1. The energy U is expressed by E and the pairing energy O, i.e. U = E − O. In the above  equations, the values of a(∗) and O were taken from the work of Mengoni and Nakajima [24]. The shell correc- tion energy Esh was calculated as the difference between the experimental mass [2] and the theoretical mass [25]. The two parameters T and E0 were determined so as to connect ρF and ρT smoothly at an appropriate match- ing energy Em. The parameters used in this work are listed in Table 5 for individual nuclei, together with the
energies of the highest discrete levels Ehighest.
... Gamma-ray transition
The γ -ray transmission coefficients are related to the photoabsorption cross sections by the detailed balance. The photoabsorption cross section is usually approx- imated by various Lorentzian shapes. In the present calculation, the shape was determined by comparing with the γ -ray spectra measured by Voignier et al. [26] at 500 keV. As for the E1 radiation, three terms were needed to reproduce the spectra, i.e. a giant-dipole res- onance (GDR), a pygmy resonance, and a correction
Figure3. Gamma-ray spectrum from n + Pt at keV
term, as in the analysis performed by Kim et al. [27]. An enhanced generalised Lorentzian (EGLO) [28] was used for the GDR and the pygmy resonance terms, while the correction term was based on a standard Lorentzian (SLO). The resonance energy (E0), resonance width (T0), and peak cross section (σ 0) were fixed for all plat- inum isotopes, and they are given in Table 6. The cal-culated γ -ray spectrum for 194Pt is compared with the data measured by Voignier et al. at an angle of 90° in Figure 3, where the measurements are multiplied by 4π . Agreement between the calculated and measured shapes is satisfactory. In this comparison, much empha- sis is placed on the spectral shape, since the 500-keV capture cross section of Voignier et al. is slightly larger than the present calculation, as seen in the succeed- ing section. For the other nuclei such as iridium and osmium isotopes, the GDR parameters for EGLO are given [29] by
@3
@4
@5
where Z, A, and N are the atomic number and mass number of a nucleus, and N = A − Z, respectively. The SLO form was used to describe the M1 and E2 radi- ations for which the parameters were taken from the work of Kopecky and Uhl [30].
In cases where measured capture cross sections are available in the keV region, the γ -ray strength functions are renormalised so that the calculated cross sections
Table5. Gamma-ray strength functions for s-wave neutron in units of 
reproduce these data. The s-wave γ -ray strength func- tions are compared in Table 7 with the values recom- mended by Mughabghab [5]. In this work, the strength functions for 191, 196, 199Pt were renormalised, whereas those for the rest of nuclei remained unchanged.
3.2.4. Pre-equilibrium parameters
The  Version  0.8.4  of  CCONE  incorporates  the  pre- equilibrium  processes  for  the  (n,  γ )  and  first-step binary  reactions  such  as  (n,  nj),  (n,  p),  (n,  d),  (n,  t),3
Table6. Pre-equilibrium parameters.
(n, He), and (n, α). In the two-exciton pre-equilibrium formalism, the single-particle state densities for protons and neutrons in a residual nucleus are described [31] by
@6
@7
respectively.  The  parameter  C0,  of  which  the  default value is unity, is changed so that the calculations repro- duce measured neutron and proton emission data such as (n, 2n) and (n, p) in the present work. The (n, 2n) reaction is a ternary reaction, which proceeds from (n, nj) by sequential decay in the framework of the multi- step statistical model. Hence, the (n, 2n) cross section is sensitive to C0 for the residual nucleus in the (n, nj) reaction. More experimental data are available for (n, 2n) than for (n, nj) in the nuclides presently concerned. In addition to the C0’s, the parameters for the knock- out and pickup reactions [32] were adjusted for α emis- sion. The pre-equilibrium parameters used are listed in Table 8, where C0’s are given only for the residual nuclei in the (n, nj) and (n, p) reactions, and are assumed to be unity for those in the other first-step binary reactions.
Figure4. Capture cross section of Pt.
4.Comparison with experimental data and other evaluated data in the fast-neutron region
The presently evaluated data are compared with exper- imental data and other evaluated data. The experimen- tal data are taken from the EXFOR database [33] that is compiled by the international data centres such as the IAEA Nuclear Data Section, the OECD NEA Data Bank, and the National Nuclear Data Center at the  Brookhaven National Laboratory. As for the general- purpose evaluated nuclear data, there exist three major libraries, i.e. JENDL-4.0 [1], ENDF/B-VII.1 [34], and JEFF-3.2 [35]. As for platinum, JEFF-3.2 contains the data on 190, 192, 194, 195, 196, 198Pt, while no platinum data are included in JENDL-4.0 and ENDF/B-VII.1. The activation cross-section files JENDL/A-96 [36] and JEFF-3.1/A [37] are also used for comparisons. We do not discuss most of the reactions for which experimen- tal data are unavailable, since it is difficult to judge  whether the present evaluation is reasonable without measurements.
The capture cross sections of  192, 194, 195, 196, 198Pt  are illustrated in Figures 4–8. Except for 198Pt, the measurements of Koehler and Guber [38] are useful for validating the evaluated data. In this work, the capture cross section of 195Pt was renormalised by considering their data, although those of 192, 194, 196Pt remained unchanged from the original calculations. The present evaluations well reproduce the data of Koehler and Guber for 192, 194, 195, 196Pt. Concerning 192Pt, the JENDL/A-96 evaluation is remarkably larger than the measurements and the other evaluations below 500 keV. As mentioned in Section 3, the 500-keV cap- ture cross section of 194Pt measured by Voignier et al.
Figure5 . Capture cross section of Pt.
Figure6 . Capture cross section of Pt.
[26] (122 ± 9 mb) is slightly larger than the present eval- uation (105.6 mb). This is why only the shape of their measured spectrum was considered for the determina- tion of the γ -ray strength functions for the platinum isotopes. As for 196Pt, the other evaluations obviously put emphasis on the data measured by Herman et al.
[39]in the energy region from 0.5 to 1.3 MeV. An expla- nation is needed for the 198Pt(n, γ ) reaction. Renor- malisation of the γ -ray strength function for 199Pt was done so that the calculated Maxwellian-averaged cross section reproduced the cross section measured by Mar- ganiec et al. [40] at kT = 30 keV, as shown in Figure 9. Figure 10 is illustrated in order to demonstrate that the Maxwellian averaging of 196Pt(n, γ )197Pt can also repro- duce the data measured by the same authors. It should be noted that renormalisation of the γ -ray strength function was not done for the latter case. The capture cross section of 190Pt was renormalised so as to repro- duce the Maxwellian-averaged cross section measured by Marganiec et al. [41] at kT = 30 keV, as seen in  Figure 11.
Figure7. Capture cross section of Pt.
Figure8 . Capture cross section of Pt.
Figures 12–17 show the (n, 2n) reaction cross sec- tions of the naturally occurring  isotopes. Experimen- tal  data  are  available  only  for  190, 192, 198Pt.  Concern- ing  190Pt,  the  present  evaluation  is  smaller  than  the data measured by Luo et al. [42]. The pre-equilibrium parameter C0 for (n, nj) would become very small, i.e. less than 0.5, in order to fit the data of Luo et al. Such a  small  value  is  unreasonable  by  comparing  with  the values  for  192, 198Pt.  In  this  work,  further  adjustment of  the  190Pt(n,  2n)  cross  section  was  not  performed by considering the facts that the abundance of 190Pt is extremely small and there exist no other measurements. The experimental data on the 192Pt(n, 2n) reaction are well  reproduced  by  the  present  evaluation,  while  the JEFF-3.2  evaluation  is  slightly  smaller  than  the  mea- surements. As for 198Pt, all the evaluations are consis- tent  with  most  of  the  measurements  around  14  MeV except the one measured by Paul and Clarke [43] (2.77 b ± 50%) which would be outside Figure 17. However, the data of Bormann et al. [44], which were obtained by the β− counting, are systematically larger than the
Figure9. Maxwellian-averaged capture cross section of 
Figure 10. Maxwellian-averaged capture cross section of 
Figure 11. Maxwellian-averaged capture cross section of Pt.
evaluations in the region from 12 to 16 MeV. The presently evaluated 194, 195, 196Pt(n, 2n) cross sections are almost consistent with the JEFF-3.2 evaluations. The (n, 2n) cross section of elemental Pt is illustrated in Figure 18, where the data of Frehaut et al. [45] were
Figure 12. Pt(n, n)Pt reaction cross section.
Figure 13. Pt(n, n)Pt reaction cross section.
Figure 14. Pt(n, n)Pt reaction cross section.
renormalised by the factor of 1.078 that was derived by Vonach et al. [46]. The present and JEFF-3.2 eval- uations are in good agreement with the measurements, while the JEFF-3.1/A evaluation deviates from the for- mer ones above 12 MeV.
Figure 15. Pt(n, n)Pt reaction cross section.
Figure 16. Pt(n, n)Pt reaction cross section.
Figure 17. Pt(n, n)Pt reaction cross section.
The charged-particle emission cross sections are depicted in Figures 19–26. As for the partial 194Pt(n,
p) reactions, the present and JEFF-3.1/A evaluations are consistent with the measurements. On the other hand,  four  evaluations  of  195Pt(n,  p)  are  somewhat
Figure 18. natPt(n, n) reaction cross section.
Figure 19. Pt(n, p)gIr (T/= .h) reaction cross section.
Figure 20. Pt(n, p)mIr (T/.ms) reaction cross sec- tion.
different from one another, although the measured data are reproduced by the present evaluation. Concern- ing the 196Pt(n, p)196mIr reaction, the pre-equilibrium parameter C0 for (n, p) was adjusted so as to reproduce the cross sections measured by Filatenkov and Chuvaev
Figure21. Pt(n, p)gIr (T/ = .h) reaction cross section.
Figure 22. Pt(n, p)mIr (T/  = .h) reaction cross section.
Figure 23. Pt(n, p)gIr (T/ =  s) reaction cross section.
[47]. They deduced the cross sections by measuring four γ -rays, i.e. 393.5, 447.1, 521.4, and 647.3 keV with high-energy resolution, while only the 355.9-keV γ - line was used for the determination of the cross section in the other experiments. The data of Filatenkov and
Figure24. Pt(n, p)mIr (T/= . h) reaction cross section.
Figure 25. Pt(n, α)Os reaction cross section.
Figure 26. Pt(n, α)Os reaction cross section.
Chuvaev were judged most reliable in this work, since it was indicated [47] that part of the 355.9-keV γ -ray peak could come from other reactions. The (n, α) cross sec- tions of 194, 196Pt, which were measured by Filatenkov and Chuvaev [47] and Coleman et al. [48], are repro- duced by the present and JEFF-3.1/A evaluations.
5.Concluding remarks
Platinum data had never been considered in the JENDL general-purpose files due to the low priority. The present work was undertaken to make JENDL com- plete for various applications. The neutron nuclear data on platinum isotopes were evaluated in the energy region from 10−5 eV  to  20  MeV.  The  RRPs of 190, 192, 194, 195, 196, 198Pt were taken from the existing compilation work, since no new measurements were available. In the low-energy region, constant and 1/v energy dependencies were assumed for the elastic scat- tering and capture cross sections of 189, 191, 193, 197Pt, since there exist no RRPs. The thermal capture cross sections of these nuclei were renormalised by using the simplified formula. The URPs were obtained for self- shielding calculations by fitting to the total and capture cross sections calculated from the nuclear models.
In this work, the statistical model code CCONE was
applied to the calculation of fast-neutron cross sections. The neutron transmission coefficients were obtained by the coupled-channel method, together with the total cross sections, the shape-elastic scattering cross sections and the direct-reaction components of the inelastic scattering cross sections. The neutron potentials were found to be reliable by comparing with the measured total cross sections. The GDR and pygmy resonance parameters for platinum isotopes, which were needed to calculate γ -ray emission, were determined so as to reproduce the shape of the γ -ray spectrum for 194Pt measured at 500 keV. The presently evaluated cross sec- tions are in good agreement with measurements, and are much better than the other evaluations such as JEFF- 3.2, JEFF-3.1/A, and JENDL/A-96. The evaluated data are compiled into ENDF-formatted data files for the next release of the JENDL general-purpose file.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank the members of the Nuclear Data Center, JAEA, for their helpful comments on this work. He is also grateful to Dr M. Ishikawa for reviewing the manuscript.
