<title>Preparation of Multifunctional Detritiation Catalyst and Design of Detritiation Reactor in Fusion Facility</title>
<Affiliation>China Academy of Engineering Physics, Institute of Materials, Mianyang, Sichuan 621907, China</Affiliation>
<author>Quanwen Wu, Wenhua Luo, Xiayan Yan, Jingwen Ba, Zhenhua Zheng, Zhiyong Huang, Jinchun Bao, Danling Dai & Daqiao Meng</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1368335</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1368335</URL>
Abstract — Tritium must be strictly defended in tritium systems because of its permeability and radioactivity. Detritiation devices are required in tritium systems, such as the glove box detritiation system, the vent detritiation system, and the air detritiation system in ITER. The method of catalytic oxidation and adsorption is widely used for air detritiation, and metal gas getter is used in glove box detritiation. Here, a Ce-based oxide-loaded honeycomb catalyst is prepared as a multifunctional detritiation  catalyst. The properties of the Ce-based oxide and catalyst are characterized by X-ray diffraction, N2-adsorption/desorption (Brunauer-Emmet-Teller method), and H2 temperature programmed reduction. The catalytic performance is tested under both O2-lean and O2-rich atmospheres. Results indicate that the Pt/Ce0.7Zr0.3O2 honeycomb catalyst fully oxidizes H2 at room temperature with high space velocity (3.2 × 104 h−1) when oxygen is sufficient. When oxygen is deficient, H2 is also fully oxidized by the catalyst at 200°C, with the oxygen supplying from the support. A detritiation test using tritium as reactant is also carried out, and the results verify the feasibility for detritiation application. An improved detritiation reactor is designed and built based on the multifunctional catalyst.
Keywords — Detritiation, honeycomb catalyst, H2-temperature programmed reduction.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Energy from the nuclear fusion reaction is considered to be one of the most potential energies in the future.      A large number of investigations have been carried out around the fusion of deuterium and tritium. Several experimental fusion facilities have been (or are being) established, for example the Joint European Torus (JET) and ITER. Large amounts of tritium will need to be handled in D-T fusion power plants. Tritium is the radio- isotope of protium, which is easily taken into the human body and is harmful to the environment. With regard to nuclear fusion reactor facilities, the multiconfinement
system and detritiation system are applied to prevent tritium leaking into the environment.1 In order to prevent tritium leaking into the building (the last barrier to con- fining tritium), a glove box detritiation system (GDS) needs to be installed. Simultaneously, an air detritiation system (ADS) needs to be installed to prevent tritium leaking into the environment.2 In the ADS, the tritium  gas is oxidized by catalyst and the tritiated water vapor is collected by adsorbents.3–5 This method can remove tri- tium effectively, but the high pressure drop in the catalyst bed limits the capability of detritiation. Our previous work6 and other studies by Uda et al. concluded that the detritiation efficiency of ADS can be obviously improved by honeycomb catalyst.7–12 In GDS, metal getter (Zr2Fe and Zr-Mn-Fe, for example) and oxidizer (CuO and hopcalite oxide, for example) are usually used to remove tritium.13–16 But the running temperature of metal getter and oxidizer is high (always higher than 350°C), and metal getter is easily  poisoned  by  gaseous  impurity  (O2 and CO, for example). The method of catalytic oxi- dizing and adsorbing is not applied in GDS because the glove box is sometimes filled with inert gas. Reducible oxide Ce0.7Zr0.3O2, which would release oxygen during the reaction process, is introduced as catalyst support in this study. CeO2 is widely used in automotive three-way catalysts for its function of oxygen storage,17,18 and the doping of Zr in CeO2 significantly improves the redox properties and increases its oxygen storage capacity19–22 (OSC). As a result, catalyst supported on Ce0.7Zr0.3O2 could oxidize tritium even under inert atmosphere. The catalyst powder is loaded on the honeycomb substrate to prepare honeycomb catalyst Pt/Ce0.7Zr0.3O2-HC, which is practicable both in GDS and ADS. The detritiation sys- tem in fusion facilities can be optimized by using this multifunctional catalyst.
II.EXPERIMENTS AND METHODS
II.A.Preparation of Support and Catalyst
Support was prepared by  the  method  of  sol-gel  and chemical precipitation. Ce(NO3)3 ·6H2O and ZrO(NO3)2 · H2O  were   dissolved   proportionally (Ce:Zr = 7:3) in deionized water. For sol-gel, the solu- tion of citric acid was dropped into the mixed solution and stirred at 65°C for 2 h. The solution was evaporated to gel at 80°C, followed by drying at 110°C overnight. The dried gel was calcined at different temperatures (500°C, 700°C, and 900°C) for 3 h in a muffle furnace. The sample was signed as CZ-SG. For chemical preci- pitation, ammonia was slowly dropped into the mixed solution with stirring until the pH = 9.0. The precipitate was aged at room temperature for 12 h, filtrated, and washed by deionized water. The precipitate was dried, calcined as before. The sample was signed as CZ-CP.
The support powder was immerged into a solution of
H2PtCl6·6H2O (0.5 wt%) and stirred at 40°C for 2 h. Then the temperature was slowly increased to 80°C until the solvent was evaporated over. The sample was dried at 110°C overnight and calcined at 500°C for 3 h to prepare the catalysts signed as Pt/CeO2 and Pt/CZ. All catalysts were reduced by 5 vol % H2/Ar at 400°C in order to remove residual Cl−.
The honeycomb substrates of cordierite were pre- treated: immersed in the solution of nitric acid (5 wt%)
for 24 h, washed with deionized water, and dried at 110°C. After being pretreated, the substrates were weighed and immersed in Pt/CZ slurry with assistance of ultrasound for 15 min. The Pt/CZ slurry was obtained from milling the mixture of Pt/CZ powder and deionized water with ball mill and the rev was set to 350 r/min. The substrates were fished out, and the superfluous slurry was blown off by compressed gas. The substrates were then dried at 110°C for 3 h and weighed, and then they were calcined at 500°C for 3 h. The process of coating repeated until the mass  increment was higher than 10%. The honeycomb catalyst sample was signed as Pt/CZ-HC.
II.B.Test of Support and Catalyst
X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to confirm the crystal structure and lattice parameter of CeO2 and CZ-SG/CP. The specific surface areas of the samples were determined using the N2 adsorption isotherm at
−196°C by the Brenauer-Emmett-Teller method on an Autosorb-1-C Physic/Chemisorptions Analyzer manufac- tured by Quantachrome Co. Ltd.
Temperature-programmed reduction (TPR) profiles were obtained with the Autosorb-1-C Physic/Chemisorptions Analyzer. In the TPR analysis, the sample was exposed to a flow of reducing gas (H2 5 vol % Ar) while the temperature was linearly increased at a constant rate. By measurement of thermal conductivity of feed and exit gas flows it was possible to obtain the reduction profile of the sample, which constituted a “fingerprint” of its reducibility. The samples (about 30 mg) were loaded on top of quartz wool in a U-shaped quartz tube (inner diameter = 10 mm) placed in a furnace. The samples were pretreated in helium flow at 350°C for 1 h to remove the adsorbed gases. After cooling down to room  temperature,  reduction  processes  using  5 vol % H2/Ar gas mixture (30 ml/min) were carried out with a heating ramp of 10°C/min. The equipment mon- itored the hydrogen consumption with a thermal conduc- tivity detector. A quartz tube filled with dried silica gel and a molecular sieve were equipped to prevent water from entering the detector.
In  order  to  test  the  catalytic  performance,  a  gas
mixture with a different ratio of H2:O2 was introduced into the reactor by argon (99.99% purity). Two hydrogen detectors were used to measure the hydrogen concentra- tions at the inlet and outlet of the reactor. The conversion rate Rc (%) and space velocity Sv  (h−1) were  defined as Rc = (Cin − Cout)/Cin × 100, Sv = Q/V, where the formats Cin, Cout, Q, and V are hydrogen concentration at inlet and outlet of  the  reactor,  gas  velocity  to  the  reactor  (cubic meter/hour), and apparent volume of the catalyst
(cubic meter), respectively. For the O2-lean atmosphere, the catalysts were reoxidized  by  O2/Ar  at  400°C  for  10 min before the performance test in order to recover  the OSC of support. While at O2-rich atmosphere, the reduced catalyst as-prepared was used.
III.EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
III.A.XRD of Carriers
In Fig. 1, the XRD patterns of the CeO2, CZ-SG, and CZ-CP powders (calcined at 500°C) are shown. The pat- terns show the fluorite-type structure of ceria-based mate- rials by comparing them with the standard powder diffraction card of CeO2 (card 34-0394) (Ref. 23). Compared to the CeO2 pattern, no additional  Bragg  peaks corresponding to impurities or secondary phases were detected in the CZ-SG patterns. The peaks of CZ-SG shifted to higher angles, indicating the constriction of interplanar spacing caused by the incorporation of Zr4+ (with lower ionic radius than Ce4+) in the cell. Therefore, it is possible to say that the solid solution was formed. But the patterns of CZ-CP showed no peak shift and additional peaks corresponding to ZrO2 were detected (marked in Fig. 1a), indicating that only little Zr4+ inserted  in  the cell of CeO2 during the chemical precipitation process. The calculated cell parameters were 5.4115 Å for CeO2, 5.4074 Å for CZ-CP, and 5.3784 Å for CZ-SG, which are consistent with the discussion before. So CZ-SG was selected as the support catalyst hereafter. Figure 1b  shows the patterns of CeO2 and CZ-SG calcined at higher temperatures (700°C and 900°C), which indicate the ther- mal stability of the crystal structure for the oxides. The same trend of peak shift for CZ was found in the high- temperature calcined samples.
III.B.H2-TPR Studies: Reduction Behavior
The reduction behavior (especially reduction tempera- ture and degree) should be particularly studied because it determines the running temperature and O2 storage for the catalyst. The support samples (CeO2 and CZ) were studied by H2-TPR (Fig. 2a). In the H2-TPR profiles of CeO2, two peaks at about 540°C and 850°C were observed, ascribed to the reduction of surface and bulk Ce4+ species to Ce3+, respectively. For Zr4+-doped samples, the first peak area (corresponding to the reducing of surface Ce4+) increased markedly, while the intensity of the second peak (corre- sponding to the reducing of bulk Ce4+) decreased. The improved reduction for bulk Ce4+ was due to the increased oxygen mobility in the defective fluorite structure caused by inserting Zr4+ into the cell of CeO2 (Ref. 19). Theoretical calculations using the Density of Functional Theory, a theory of first principle in physics, also support this conclusion. They concluded that doping markedly facilitated the reduction of Ce4+ because  of the decrease for oxygen vacancy formation energy. On one hand, the dopant modified the electronic structures of ceria (electro- nic  relaxation)  and  on  the  other  hand  it  facilitated  the structural distortions24 (structural relaxation). For Zr-doped ceria, the dopant-induced electronic modification was unimportant compared to the structural relaxation.25 It denoted that inserting Zr4+ results in the aberration of CeO2 lattice (because of the different ion radius for Zr4+ and Ce4+), which decreased the oxygen vacancy forma- tion energy and increased the concentration of oxygen vacancies. The second reduction peak in the  CZ-SG  TPR profile almost  disappeared, but it was maintained  in the CZ-CP TPR profile. The difference was because only little Zr4+ was inserted into the cell of CeO2 for CZ-CP, which was consistent with the previous XRD results.
Fig. 1. (a) XRD patterns of CeO2 and CZ prepared by the method of chemical precipitation and sol-gel and (b) patterns of CeO2 and CZ calcined at different temperatures.
Fig. 2. The H2-TPR profiles of oxides prepared (a) by the methods of chemical precipitation and sol-gel and (b) calcined at different temperatures.
As discussed in Sec. II.A, the method of sol-gel was more suitable for preparation of the CeO2-ZrO2 solid solu- tion; the CeO2 and CZ used henceforth were all prepared by sol-gel without especial explanation. The special surface area of CeO2 and CZ sintered at different temperatures (500°C, 700°C, and 900°C) are shown in Table I. The special surface area of CZ-500 was 50% higher than that of CeO2-500 because of the addition of Zr4+. When calcined at 700°C, the surface area of CeO2 declined from 56 to 8.1 m2/g, while CZ-700 was still 61 m2/g. The results indicate that the special surface areas as well as thermal stability  were  enhanced  by Zr4+. This conclusion is supported by the results of CeO2-900 and CZ-900 (shown in Fig. 2b).
Coming back to the TPR profiles of CeO2 and CZ calcined at 500°C, 700°C, and 900°C (shown in Fig. 2b), for CeO2 it was evident that the reduction peaks of sur- face Ce4+ weakened (or even disappeared for CeO2-900) as the calcination temperature rose (namely, the special surface area decreased). The reduction temperature for bulk Ce4+ did not change, while the integrated area increased. This implies that the reduction of surface
TABLE I
Specific Surface Area of CeO2 and CZ Calcined at Different Temperatures
Ce4+ was affected severely by the special surface area. For each CZ sample, there was only one reduction peak and the higher calcination temperature shifted the peaks to higher reduction temperature. The degree of crystal- linity was increased by higher calcination temperature, resulting in more difficulty for Ce4+ reduction. Although calcined at 900°C, the reduction temperature for CZ was lower than that of CeO2.
Because the temperature during the process of detri- tiation was always lower than 500°C, CeO2-500 and CZ-500 were used as catalyst support. Figure 3a shows the TPR profiles of Pt/CeO2-500 and Pt/CZ-500 (Pt/Al2O3 was also tested for comparison). The surface reduction peaks shifted to about 200°C, which indicates the improve- ment of CeO2 and CZ reducibility by Pt loading. Experimental and theoretical studies concluded the results for two reasons. First, the strong metal-support interaction (SMSI) promoted the formation of oxygen vacancy by electron transfer, which was propitious  to the reduction  of support.26,27 Second, hydrogen was dissociated by Pt, and the rapid supply of hydrogen atoms to support by spill- over process strongly modified the reduction kinetics.19
The reduction peak of bulk Ce4+ for Pt/CeO2 remained (at about 780°C), while it disappeared for Pt/CZ. So surface-loaded Pt only promoted the reduc- tion of surface Ce4+ and had little effect for bulk Ce4+ reduction. Computer works for Pt/CeO2 and Pt-doped
CeO2  also  obtained  the  similar  conclusions  that  the
effect of  Pt  incorporation  (either  doped  or  loaded)  was  a  local  effect  rather  than  a  global  effect.28  So,
the  complete  reduction  of  Pt/CZ  at  low  temperature
was facilitated by the action of both loaded Pt and inserted Zr4+ cation. This was why Pt/CZ was chosen  for detritiation in inert atmosphere.
Fig. 3.  (a) The H2-TPR profiles of catalysts supported by various oxides and (b) Pt/CZ reoxidized at different temperatures.
Reduction peaks at about 350°C were detected on TPR profiles of both Pt/CeO2 and Pt/CZ. Referring to other reports29 and the discussion about SMSI (Ref. 30), the peaks corresponded to the reduction of residual Pt oxides, oxidized by lattice oxygen. The reduction peaks for Pt oxides in Pt/CeO2 and Pt/CZ shifted to higher temperature compared to those in Pt/Al2O3 because the SMSI in Pt/CeO2 and Pt/CZ was strong, while it was weak in Pt/Al2O3. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was used to determine the state of Pt on the surface of Al2O3 and CeO2-Al2O3 (Ref. 31). The result indicates that the Pt loaded on CeO2 was apt to be oxidation state and was more difficult to be reduced. This is why the CZ-supported catalyst inhibited the sintering of Pt, which was an impor- tant advantage of Pt/CZ compared to Pt/Al2O3.
III.C.Catalytic Performance
In order to test the catalytic performance of Pt/CZ  powder, H2 was used as reactant. The ratio of H2:O2 in raw gas was set to about 3:1 (the content of H2 was about
1.5 vol %), which meant O2 was deficient. Before the test, Pt/CZ was reoxidized at 5 vol % O2/Ar at 400°C because the as-prepared sample was prereduced. The results are shown  in  Fig. 4a, and Pt/Al2O3 was  tested  for comparison. The conversion rate of H2 catalytic oxi- dized by Pt/Al2O3 was always 70% as the temperature was raised from room temperature to 300°C. But for Pt/CZ, the conversion rate of H2 exceeded 70% at about 180°C, the  temperature  at  which  the  reduction  peak  of Pt/CZ started. Also, H2 was almost fully oxidized at 225°C, with a conversion rate higher than 99.97%  (namely, the conversion factor higher than 3000) because the lower limit for H2 detection was about 5 ppm. The results indicate that the support began to be reduced at 180°C and to supply ample oxygen for reaction at 225°C. The state was maintained for about 10 min until the conversion rate fell to 70%, which implied that the sup- port was completely reduced and normal catalysis works. From the results, it can be seen that the running tempera- ture of Pt/CZ was at least 100°C lower than that of oxidant (for CuO or MnO2 the running temperatures  were higher than 350°C) for inert atmosphere detritiation.
Fig. 4. The conversion rate of H2 catalyzed (a) by Pt/Al2O3, Pt/CZ (also the reoxidized sample) and (b) by Pt/CZ-HC with oxygen-deficient atmosphere.
This was the first advantage of Pt/CZ for detritiation. The second advantage was that although the support was completely reduced, Pt/CZ maintained its normal cataly- sis while CuO and MnO2 drastically lost their activities when they were reduced. The third advantage of Pt/CZ is discussed below: it was easy for regeneration.
After being completely reduced, Pt/CZ samples were reoxidized in O2/Ar flow at different temperatures. The H2-TPR profiles of reoxidized samples are  shown  in  Fig. 3b. The reduction peaks shifted to higher temperature as the reoxidation temperature rose, which implies that the oxidation extent of support is enhanced. When the reox- idation temperature was lower than 400°C, the reduction peaks were irregular and the peak areas were small. The areas increased a little while the reduction temperature  increased a lot when the reoxidation temperature was higher than 400°C. Considering both peak area (corre- sponding to the amount of consumed hydrogen) and reduc- tion temperature, the optimal reoxidation temperature was 400°C. The sample reoxidized at 400°C is validated in Fig. 4a, where it oxidized H2 as fresh sample.
For honeycomb catalyst Pt/CZ-HC, both the conver- sion rates in O2-rich and O2-deficient atmospheres were tested (shown in Table II and Fig. 4b). With enough oxy- gen the conversion rate of H2 exceeded 99.8% at room temperature (corresponding conversion factors were col- lected in Table II), while the initial H2 concentration ranged from 3000 to 5000 ppm. The gas flow increased from 250 to 500 ml/min, so the corresponding space velo- city  ranged  from  1.6  ×  104  h−1  to  3.2  ×  104  h−1   (the catalyst was sized as φ8 mm × 20 mm). For traditional particle catalyst, the space velocity was about 1000 h−1 (Ref. 32). Our previous work6 about Pt/Al2O3-HC and other studies all concluded that the honeycomb catalyst can increase the space velocity by two orders of magnitude without decreasing the H2 conversion rate.12,33 Similar to the Pt/CZ powder, when oxygen was deficient Pt/CZ-HC supplied oxygen during the reaction process (shown in Fig. 4b). The temperature at which oxygen rapidly released
was about 150°C, which was lower than the Pt/CZ powder (about 200°C). That Pt/CZ was well dispersed on substrate and the regular structure was convenient for H2 diffusion. The H2 concentration in the experiment was much higher than the tritium concentration in real conditions because the accurate measure of low concentration (lower than 10 ppm) H2 was impossible. In order to demonstrate the availability of this catalyst to future fusion detritiation facilities, tritium was used as the reactant with low concentration  because  tritium  could be accurately detected by ionization chamber. This experiment was carried out in a detritiation system con- nected to a glove box, which contained the mixture gas of air and tritium. Before the test, the catalyst  was dried at 120°C with Ar flow for about 10 min. The  water vapor in the glove box was controlled within 10 ppm, which was reported to be harmless to the catalyst.10 The detritiation system was equipped with a reactor con- tained	6.4-L	Pt/CZ-HC	(eight	catalysts	sized φ80 mm × 160 mm). The mixture gas was circulated from the glove box to the system and the cyclic flow rate was about 50 L/min (space velocity was about 470 h−1). The tritium concentrations were detected at the inlet and outlet of the reactor. Before the experiment the tritium concentration in the glove box was 364 GBq/m3 (about 4 ppm). During the experiment the cyclic conversion rate was calculated from the concentration at the inlet, and the conversion rate for a single pass was calculated from the concentration at the inlet and outlet at the same time. The results (shown in Fig. 5) show that the single pass conver- sion factor (detritiation factor) was higher than 100 in the first 1 h, and the cyclic conversion rate was higher than 70% within 80 min. Then, the single detritiation factor decreased to 25 (conversion rate 96%) because of the lower concentration of tritium. In another tritium test, using Pt/Al2O3-HC as catalyst with higher tritium concen- tration (80 ,300 ppm) reflected a similar trend for detri- tiation factor. This test indicated that the catalyst was really
useful for detritiation.
TABLE II
Results of H2 Catalytic Oxidation by Pt/CZ-HC with Oxygen-Rich Atmosphere
Fig. 5. Tritium conversion rate (cyclic and single pass) catalyzed by Pt/CZ-HC.
IV.FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF DETRITIATION REACTOR
As discussed in Sec. III.C, the catalyst  Pt/CZ-HC was viable for detritiation in air and inert atmosphere.   To be used in inert atmosphere glove box  detritiation,  the amount of consumed hydrogen by Pt/CZ must be considered. CuO was used as the standard sample. The test of H2-TPR for CuO (11 mg) was carried out under the same condition of the catalyst samples  (the  curve was added in Fig. 3a). The integral area of the reduction peak for CuO was 6344. The consumed hydrogen was equal   to   CuO   during    the    reduction    reaction (CuO + H2 → Cu + H2O).  The  integral  area  of  the  first reduction peak (Fig. 3) for Pt/CZ (34 mg) was calculated to be 1310. Compared with those of CuO,
the consumed hydrogen for Pt/CZ could be calculated to be 840 μmol/g. A glove box with 2-m3 volume con- tained tritium and the concentration was 0.2571 Ci/L (about 100 ppm), which was much higher than the  normal level. If the tritium in this glove box was fully oxidized by Pt/CZ, only about 10.5-g catalyst was  needed to supply sufficient oxygen. For application, a honeycomb substrate with 60-mm diameter and 120-mm height could support over 20 g Pt/CZ (the weight ratio was usually higher than 10% when Pt/CZ-HC was pre- pared). And in air detritiation tens of honeycomb cata- lysts were filled in the reactor. So, it was feasible to use Pt/CZ-HC in both air detritiation and inert atmosphere glove box detritiation. The detritiation system is dis- cussed below.
Figure 6a is a typical tritium confinement system, and
it could be simplified to Fig. 6b by using Pt/CZ-HC. First, the GDS was omitted and the function was incorporated into the ADS. Second, a majority of heaters could be cancelled (details discussed below) because the catalyst ran at room temperature with enough O2. Figure 7 is a diagram and photo of catalytic reactors in a detritiation system. Air with tritium in the room was pumped into the system and first flew through the primary adsorption bed to remove the common water in air. The tritium was oxidized in the catalytic reactors filled with Pt/CZ-HC, and then the tritiated water was adsorbed in the secondary adsorption bed. The five reactors were designed in parallel in order to increase the gas flow. Each reactor contained 21 tubes filled with Pt/CZ-HC and the total volumes of the catalysts were 40 L. The reactors were designed for 500-m3/h gas  flow,  with corresponding  space  velocity of
1.25 × 104 h−1. Compared to the reactor of the tritium removal system in the OMEGA laser target chamber31 filled with alumina supported granular catalyst, the space velocity increased by an order of magnitude.
Fig. 6.  (a) Typical tritium confinement system and (b) the simplified system using Pt/CZ-HC.
Fig. 7.  (a) The diagram and (b) photo of catalytic reactor filled with Pt/CZ-HC.
The catalyst displayed excellent catalytic perfor- mance at low temperature, thus the reactors worked at room temperature when the system was used for air detritiation. One reactor was destined (the red reactor in Fig. 7) for glove box detritiation, and a cycle of heated vapor was added in the reactor. When used for glove box detritiation, only the special reactor worked at about 200°C. However, this designed detritiation system could not be operated for atmosphere detritiation and glove box detritiation simultaneously. So it would better be a standby detritiation system for emergencies. When tri- tium leaks into the glove box, it would run as a GDS, while it would run as an ADS when tritium leaks into the room.
V.CONCLUSION
A Pt-loaded catalyst, supported by Ce0.7Zr0.3O2, was prepared and the properties of support and catalyst were tested principally by TPR. The results indicate that the doped Zr  improved  the  reduction  of  bulk  Ce4+,  and  the loaded Pt markedly improved the reduction of surface Ce4+. As a result, Pt/CZ was able to release abundant oxygen under O2-lean condition at about 200°C. On the other hand, the regular honeycomb structure of Pt/CZ-HC increased the space velocity of the detritiation reactor by at least an order of magnitude, with the H2 conversion factor higher than 1000 under O2-rich condition. In other words, the catalyst Pt/CZ-HC could be used for inert atmosphere detritiation as well as air detritiation. The catalytic perfor- mance test (carried out with both hydrogen and tritium) and feasibility analysis also validate this conclusion. Last, a catalytic detritiation reactor of 500-m3/h flow rate was designed based on the new catalyst, and the performance test for the reactor is under way.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Weidong Liu, Yan Xue, Zhirong Song, and Haicheng Ding for supporting the experi- ments, and Haibo Li and Jie Du for helpful advice. This research is supported by the China Academy of Engineering Physics (grant TCGH0711) and the Commission of Science and Technology for National Defense Industry (grant HNKF-2).
