<title>A dose assessment method for arbitrary geometries with virtual reality in the nuclear facilities decommissioning</title>
<Affiliation>a.Department of Physics, Karnatak University, Dharwad 580003, India;b.Health Physics Section, Kaiga Atomic Power Station-3&4, NPCIL, Karwar 581400, India;c.Experimental Nuclear Physics Department, Nuclear Research Centre, P.O. 13759, Cairo, Egypt;d.Institute of High Energy Physics, CAS, Beijing 100049, China</Affiliation>
<author>Nan Chaoa, Yong-kuo Liu, Hong Xia, Abiodun Ayodeji, Lu Bai</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.08.020</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.08.020</URL>
ABSTRACT
During the decommissioning of nuclear facilities, a large number of cutting and demolition activities are per- formed, which results in a frequent change in the structure and produce many irregular objects. In order to assess dose rates during the cutting and demolition process, a ﬂexible dose assessment method for arbitrary geometries and radiation sources was proposed based on virtual reality technology and Point-Kernel method. The initial geometry is designed with the three-dimensional computer-aided design tools. An approximate model is built automatically in the process of geometric modeling via three procedures namely: space division, rough modeling of the body and ﬁne modeling of the surface, all in combination with collision detection of virtual reality technology. Then point kernels are generated by sampling within the approximate model, and when the material and radiometric attributes are inputted, dose rates can be calculated with the Point-Kernel method. To account   for radiation scattering eﬀects, buildup factors are calculated with the Geometric-Progression formula in the  ﬁtting function. The eﬀectiveness and accuracy of the proposed method was veriﬁed by means of simulations using diﬀerent geometries and the dose rate results were compared with that derived from CIDEC code, MCNP code and experimental measurements.
Keywords:
Dose assessment Geometric modeling Point kernel method Virtual reality
Nuclear facilities decommissioning
1.Introduction
The working environments during nuclear facility decommissioning are under high radiation and high risk, which makes it diﬃcult to analyze the working process through practical experiments. In order to avoid this constraint, researchers such as Kim et al. (2006) and Jeong   et al. (2014) use virtual reality (VR) techniques to simulate the de- commissioning process, and perform dose assessment and safety ana- lysis in virtual environments where the procedures can be carried out in a more feasible and safe way. In order to perform dose assessment and safety analysis during the cutting or demolition works, it is necessary to provide a ﬂexible gamma dose rates calculation method for arbitrary geometries and gamma radiation sources to improve the eﬃciency and accuracy of simulations.
The Monte Carlo and the Point-Kernel methods are commonly used for calculating radiation shield eﬀectiveness and dose rates. The Monte Carlo method is a high-precision probabilistic method that suﬀers from long computing time, for instance the Monte Carlo Neutron and Photo Transport Code (MCNP) (Breismeister, 2000). By contrast, the Point- Kernel method is an analytical method with less computing time but lacks rigor. When time is essential, the Point-Kernel method is usually
used (Ohga, 2005).
The typical programs based on the Point-Kernel method are the QAD (Cain and QAD-CG, 1977), the PUTZ (Ingersoll, 1986), the Mi- croshield, etc. These programs build the geometric space by manually combining geometry technology and modeling, which makes it diﬃcult and ineﬃcient to describe large-scale complex environments, especially dynamic environments such as the one obtainable in nuclear facilities. In order to solve the modeling problems of complex geometries, Vela et al. (2006) developed a code named CIDEC for calculating dose rates in scenarios with complex geometries and gamma radiation sources. The code uses the geometric modeling capabilities of computer-aided design (CAD) tools to construct the geometry, and then the geometry is exported to a DXF ﬁle format. In the second step, each volume is loaded with material and radiological attributes, and then the dose rates are calculated with the point kernel method. However, the code can’t ob- tain the details of geometries, such as the volume, and has a limitation in the environment where structures and geometries change frequently. To cope with both accuracy and time requirements, Caracena et al. (2013) presented an algorithm to calculate gamma dose rates for VR simulation applications in nuclear safeguards and security. The algo- rithm can generate a non-regular mesh model and computes the dose
rate in real time. Moreover, Caracena et al. (2017) used the KD-tree based volume division method to improve the eﬃciency of the Point- Kernel method. However, geometrical source shapes are restricted to parallelepipeds.
Many researchers have studied the application of virtual reality in nuclear facilities decommissioning, such as the ALARA (as low as rea- sonably achievable) planning tool VISIPLAN (Vermeersch and Bosstraeten,  1998;  Vermeersch,  2003),  and  the  three-dimensional si-
mulation  tool  VRdose  Planner  system  (Sz˝oke  and  Johnsen,  2013).
These programs also adopt the Point-Kernel method and can calculate
dose rates in real time. However, the radiation sources need to be simpliﬁed with basic geometries.
Mól et al. (2009a, 2009b) used a game engine to support dose as- sessment and to optimize the operational routines in nuclear plants. The
simulation platform collects dose rate data from radiation monitors installed in a real plant, then assess dose for personnel by interpolation, although it is only suitable in cases where the structures are constant. During the decommissioning of nuclear facilities, a number of cut- ting and demolition operations are necessary, which makes the en- vironments change frequently and lead to the production of various structures with arbitrary geometries and gamma radiation sources. The existing studies mainly approximate the radiation sources by combining the  basic  geometries  (such  as  parallelepiped,  cylinder,  sphere,  etc.)	0	V
manually. Also, their need for much geometric modeling time for complex environments makes the dose assessment process ineﬃcient.Consequently, this paper proposes a ﬂexible gamma dose rate cal- culation method based on virtual reality and Point-Kernel method. The VR-based method (VRBM) proposed in this research can model for structures with arbitrary geometries and radiation sources auto- matically and has the ability to deal with the scenario where the structure changes frequently. The initial geometric model is designed by computer-aided design (CAD) tools, such as SolidWorks, 3dMax or Unigraphics. After the initial geometric model is loaded, an approx- imate model is built automatically by space division and collision de- tection, and then a set of point kernels are distributed within the ap- proximate model by sampling. Then inputs such as the initial materials and radiological attributes are speciﬁed and the dose rates are calcu- lated with the Point-Kernel method. When the cutting procedure is performed, the reconstructed model is updated automatically. The method makes it possible to assess dose rates for arbitrary geometries and radiation sources eﬃciently during the nuclear facilities decom- missioning.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 brieﬂy describes the
Point-Kernel method and the CIDEC code's method. Section 3 focuses on the implementation of the proposed method. Section 4 is allotted to describe the experiments and results. Section 5 analyzes the results of experiments. Section 6 presents the concluding remarks.
2.Methods used for dose assessment
The two methods used in this paper are the Point-Kernel method and CIDEC code's method. The following section provides a brief de- scription of Point-Kernel method and CIDEC code's method.
2.1.Point kernel method
The Point-Kernel method is an approximate but eﬃcient approach for evaluating photon responses in shielding analyses. However, be- cause the method lacks rigor, it has limitations in cases that need high precision. Nevertheless, the method is still successfully applied in de- sign and safety analysis works. When the method is correctly applied, it can provide fairly good results for gamma radiation (Harima, 1993).
The main idea of Point-Kernel method is that the radiation source can be seen as consisting of a series of discrete elementary cells (point kernels), and the dose rate at the detecting point is composed of the contributions of all point kernels to the detecting point (Prokhorets,2007). The total dose rate from a point kernel isotropic with energy E to the detecting point is given by:
@1
where r is the distance from the point kernel to the detecting point, C is gamma ﬂux density to dose rate conversion factor, S is the strength of the point kernel, B is the buildup factor, which can be obtained from the ANSI/ANS-6.4.3 and the Geometric-Progression formula (ANSI/ANS- 6.4.3, 1991). The mean free paths (mfp), t, between the point kernel  and the detecting point can be calculated with the following equation
@2
where i is the index of the space region, n is the number of regions, μi is the linear attenuation factor for i-th region, and di is the section of the line between the detecting point and the point kernel in the i-th region. Therefore, the total dose rate at the detecting point can be calcu- lated by integration of Eq. (1) over the source volume V and summation
over the energies E of radiation spectrum
@3
CIDEC code's method
The CIDEC code can compute dose rate values in scenarios with a set of volumetric radioactive sources and shields (Vela et al., 2006). Before doing the calculations, the geometry of the scenario is generated using the CAD tools, and the ﬁle corresponding to the geometry is saved in DXF format. Once the geometry is loaded, material and radiometric attributes are imported for each volume. All volumes are considered to be homogeneous, both from isotopic and material composition points of view. Then a set of cell (source) points are assigned to each radioactive source. The method for generating cell points is shown in Fig. 1.
A parallelepiped volume containing the volume is obtained, and the coordinate of lower bound of the parallelepiped is (xm, ym, zm). A point Pe external to the parallelepiped is deﬁned with coordinates (xm+d, ym+d, zm+d) where d is a constant. For each point Pi of the grid, the intersection points between the volume contour and the line Pe Pi are calculated. The intersection point closer to Pi is deﬁned as Pr. The normal that is pointing outward to the surface at Pr is deﬁned as vn, and vim is a vector from Pi to Pr. Therefore, Pi is inside the volume if the inner  product  v  ∙v     >  0.  Otherwise,  P  is  outside  the  volume.  In  the next step, the cell points are randomly selected from the points inside the volume. Once the cell points are obtained, the speciﬁc activity for each cell point is calculated. Then, the Point-Kernel method is used for dose calculation in a uniform continuous media.
Fig. 1. Two-dimensional viewgraph showing the method for identifying cell points. A mesh grid is represented with dashed lines. Pi points are the intersections in the mesh grid. The volume contour is shown in blue. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 2. The structure of the dose assessment method for arbitrary geometries and gamma radiation sources.
3.Methodology
The structure of dose assessment for arbitrary geometries and gamma radiation sources during the decommissioning of nuclear fa- cilities is shown in Fig. 2. The initial geometric model is obtained, and an approximate model is built according to the initial model, and then point kernels are generated to calculate dose rates. When the environ- ment is changed, the above process is repeated to maintain the actual geometries.
3.1.Geometric modeling
Prior to dose calculation, geometric models in the radioactive en- vironment are required. The initial geometries of objects are designed in CAD tools. To maintain a high accuracy, a ﬁne mesh resolution is required. When geometric models are loaded, approximate models are built automatically with cuboids and split faces. The method of geometric modeling is shown in Fig. 3. It consists of three stages: space division, rough geometric modeling of the body and ﬁne geometric modeling of the surface.
3.1.1.Space division
In the process of space division, a set of the axis-aligned cuboid is used to identify the surface area of the object, and those that contact with the contour of the object is identiﬁed and marked by using colli- sion detection (Zachmann, 1997) in virtual reality. The procedure for space division is shown in Fig. 4.
We deﬁne the cuboid A and B as neighbors if they have an over- lapping face. First, the rough division threshold (RT) is determined. Then, a large cuboid is chosen as the initial division space, and it should be larger than the object to ensure the connectivity of cuboids. In order to consider both of the surface source (such as the wall and ﬂoor, etc.) and the volume source (such as tubes, etc.), the binary tree is applied to split the spaces. The initial space is the root of the tree. In each itera- tion, the original cuboid space is divided into two cuboids with the same size by a split plane located at the center of the longest axis and perpendicular to the longest axis, and then each part is checked whe- ther it intersects with the object by collision detection. If a cuboid in- tersects with the object, that means the cuboid needs a further division, so it is stored in the set of cuboids to be divided and its neighbors are also updated; otherwise, that means the cuboid is inside or outside the object, so it needn’t be divided as shown in Fig. 3(c). Once a cuboid is divided, it is destroyed and no longer exists anymore. The process above keeps repeating until the longest side of the cuboid that is in
Fig. 3. Two-dimensional graph showing the modeling process for arbitrary geometries. The initial division space is shown in (a), and it is divided into two parts of A and B by a split line in (b), and only the part that collides with the object need to be further divided. The schematic diagram after several divisions is shown in (c). The stage of rough geometric modeling of the body is shown in (d). The green, red and yellow areas are outside, inside and in contact with the object respectively. The rough model is composed of the yellow and red areas. The stage of ﬁne geometric modeling of the surface is shown in (e). The intersections between the object and rectangles’ border are shown in red circles. The connections of intersections are shown in red line, which is quite similar to object's contour. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 4. The procedure for space division.
contact with the object reach the rough division threshold, and the cuboid is marked to identify the contour of the object.
3.1.2.Rough Geometric Modeling of the Body (RGMB)
Before explaining the process involved in RGMB, several concepts need to be deﬁned. The cuboid that has contact with the object is called boundary voxel. The cuboid that is inside the object is called internal voxel, and the cuboid that is outside the object is called external voxel. When cuboid A and B are neighbors, we deﬁned that A and B are connected neighbors if neither of them is boundary voxel; otherwise, the cuboid A and B are non-connected neighbors. Unless otherwise stated, voxels are cuboids generated from space division.
After the process of space division, all connected neighbors of each voxel are stored. The boundary voxels divide the other voxels into two parts inside and outside the object, and the two parts are not connected. The rough model is composed of the boundary voxels and internal voxels, as shown in Fig. 3(e). The external voxels need to be identiﬁed and excluded from the voxels set, and then the remaining part is the rough model of the object. The way to identify the external voxels is as follow: (1) If a voxel denoted as C whose face overlaps the boundary of the initial division space is found, then the voxel must belong to
external voxel. (2) The connected neighbors of external voxels must also belong to external voxel. Therefore, all the external voxels can be obtained by iteration to ﬁnd the connected neighbors of each external voxel from the voxel C.
3.1.3.Fine Geometric Modeling of the Surface (FGMS)
After RGMB stage, the boundary and internal voxels are obtained. Because the model of RGMB is composed of cuboids, it requires small voxels and more time to obtain a high precision result on the surface of objects. In order to eﬃciently obtain a ﬁne model, the method of ﬁne geometric modeling of the surface (FGMS) is used to approximate to the object's surface. The two-dimensional view of the process of FGMS is shown in Fig. 3(e). It can be seen that in the case of two-dimension, the connection of the intersections between the boundary voxels’ borders and the object is quite similar to the object's contour. The same strategy is applied in the case of three-dimension, where the connections of the intersections are faces made of triangles. The intersections between the boundary voxels’ edges and the object are obtained by ray-traced col- lision detection (Möller and Trumbore, 1997) without considering the speciﬁc shape of the object. In order to build the surface of objects, ﬁve typical intersecting cases and the landmarks used to identify the di- rection of the outside and inside of the object are determined as shown in Fig. 5. If a boundary voxel doesn’t belong to the ﬁve cases that mean it needs to be further divided or ignored.
The intersections on the boundary voxels may not be on the same plane. Therefore, split planes are composed of triangular faces. The split planes don’t perform division procedure to boundary voxels. Instead, they are only used as interfaces to identify the inside and outside parts of the object. The schematic diagram of FGMS is shown in Fig. 6. The triangular face ΔP1P2P3 and ΔP1P3P4 are used to approximate the sur- face of the object in Fig. 6(a), and they divide the boundary voxel into two parts that are inside and outside the object. Intersections between the boundary voxel's edges and the object can constitute many trian- gular faces, but not all of them are needed. If the landmark used to
identify the external direction of the object is denoted as G, and the nearest intersection of G is denoted as P1, then the vector P1G represents
the external direction of the object. The rule for constructing split tri- angular faces is shown in Fig. 6(b), and it can be described as follows:
(1) No overlap between the triangular faces. (2) The positive direction
of a split plane's normal Vn is deﬁned as pointing to the outside of the object, and thenthe angle between Vn and P1G  should be less than 90 degrees, that P1G Vn 0.
The main loop of FGMS is shown in Fig. 7(a). First, the ﬁne division threshold (FT) is determined. If a boundary voxel belongs to the ﬁve typical cases, the intersections on the boundary voxel are sorted and triangular faces are constructed according to the construction rules of split planes as shown in Fig. 7(b). If the total number of intersections on the boundary voxel is less than three that means the intersecting vo- lume is far smaller than the boundary voxel's, so the boundary voxel is ignored. Otherwise, the boundary voxels need to be further divided until they either fall into one of the ﬁve cases or reaches the FT. When
Fig. 5. Five typical intersecting cases. The intersections of the voxel's edges and the object are shown in red point, and they don’t have to be on the same plane. Each edge at most has one intersection, and the total number of intersections on the boundary voxel is at least three. The split planes composed of triangular faces are shown in yellow. The landmarks are shown in green points. The landmarks are corners in (a), (d) and (e), the center of the edges in (b), the center of faces in (c). (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
the boundary voxel reaches the FT and doesn’t belong to any of the ﬁve cases, the whole of its space is seen as part of the object. Similarly, the process above is repeated until all boundary voxels are processed. Ul- timately, the ﬁne model is composed of the internal voxels and the parts of the boundary voxels inside the object.
3.2.Dose calculation
Before calculating the dose rate, the point kernels are needed to describe the radiation source. The method of generating point kernels is shown in Fig. 8. The point kernels are generated by sampling each voxel of FGMS uniformly. However, not all of the sampling points in the boundary voxels are eﬀective. The samples that are inside the object are chosen as point kernels with the help of split planes. The method to
Fig. 6. The schematic diagram of FGMS. The land-
mark used to identify the external direction of the object is shown in green point G, the green arrow

P1G is the vector of the external direction. (a) The
intersections on the boundary voxel and the object are shown in red points P1, P2, P3 and P4. The tri- angular face ΔP1P2P3 and ΔP1P3P4 are split planes. The part of the boundary voxel that inside the object is shown in yellow, the black points A, B, C, D, E and F are the corners of the boundary voxel that outside
the object.  The  blue arrow  Vn2 and  the red   arrow P4 Vn1 are the normal of ΔP1P2P3 andΔP1P3P4 respec-
θ2 is the angle between Vn2 and P1G. The angles θ1
and θ2 should be less than 90 degrees. (b) The red points Pi (i = 1,2…,6) are intersections. And the ΔP1P2P3, ΔP1P3P4, ΔP1P4P5 and ΔP1P5P6 are trian- gular faces with the normal of Vn1, Vn2, Vn3 and Vn4
respectively. The sort direction is shown in black arrow. (For interpretation of the references to color
identify the eﬀective point kernels in boundary voxels is shown in    Fig. 8(b). We produced a line segment between the samples and the external landmark, G. If the line segment intersects with the split planes (such as the line segment AA’ and BB’ intersect with ΔP1P3P4 at A′ and B′ respectively), that means the sampling point is inside the object, and then a point kernel is generated at the sampling position; Otherwise, the sampling point is abandoned. If the boundary voxel don’t have an in- ternal corner that means the source is a surface, and then the point kernels are generated by sampling the split plane. This also means that the enclosed surface should be divided into non-enclosed surfaces during the modeling phase in CAD tools.
The approximate volume of the object can be obtained from FGMS. The density of point kernels is denoted as DL. The number of point kernels, n, in the i-th voxel can be calculated with respect to its volume,
Fig. 7. The procedure for FGMS. (a) the main loop of FGMS. (b) The ﬂow chart of constructing split triangular faces.
@4
where rd is the detecting point, S is the strength of the source, V is the volume of the source, g is the number of voxels in FGMS, ni is the number of point kernels in the i-th voxel, m is the number of energy E of radiation spectrum, P(Ek) is the probability that the source emits pho- tons with energy Ek, C is gamma ﬂux density to dose rate conversion factor, B is the buildup factor, t is the mean free paths (mfp) between the point kernel and the detecting point, r is the distance from the point kernel to the detecting point.
When the cutting or demolition operation is performed as explained by Kim et al. (2016), the voxel that intersects with the cutting trajectory is selected and the surface is recalculated. And the volume and activities of the new geometric models are also updated.
4.Experiments and results
This section is devoted to an experimental study of the dose as- sessment method proposed in the paper. The ﬁrst set of experiments was run to illustrate the geometric modeling capability of the VRBM proposed in this paper. The second set of experiments was run to verify the dose rate accuracy of the method compared with MCNP and CIDEC code. The backscattering was neglected in the VRBM and CIDEC.
4.1.Basic geometries modeling experiments
Since complex geometries are composed of basic geometries, six kinds of basic geometries were used to test the geometric modeling capability of VRBM. The six geometries are the sphere, semi-sphere, cylinder, parallelepiped, tube and U-shaped tube, where the convex surface, a concave surface, ﬂat surface and their combination were considered. Because large division thresholds can cause large errors, the division thresholds for both RT and FT were set to 0.1 m to make a large error situation.
The modeling snapshots were shown in Fig. 9. It can be observed that in the same division situation, the model generated by the process FGMS is smoother and shows better similarity with the original model than the model generated by RGMB.
The dimensions of the six basic geometries and the modeling results were shown in Table 1. It can be seen that after the process FGMS, the deviation of the approximate model to real model is far lower than that of RGMB at the same division situation. The maximum relative devia- tion of the RGMB's model is 62.31%. By contrast, the relative deviation of the FGMS's model is lower, 0.29%, illustrating that the FGMS method presents more accurate and eﬀective model. Furthermore, we can also see that in the FGMS, the minimum deviation is 0.1% for sphere, while
The  second  sets  of  experiments  were  designed  to  illustrate  the
performance of VRBM compared with MCNP and the Point-Kernel code CIDEC. Three basis cases were considered in the experiment, including
(A) No shielding case, (B) shieling case, (C) Surface source case, (D) Backscattering case and (E) measured data, which were already used as benchmark cases in dose rate experiments in CIDEC (Vela, 2006). The results of MCNP were generated by running the code for two hours on a computer with 3.3 GHz processor and 8 GB RAM on Windows operating system.
4.2.1.No shielding case
The basis case is a 20 20 2  cm cube located  in an empty room  ﬁlled with air. Two kinds of sources are considered in the experiment. The ﬁrst source is a 137Cs with the activity of 4.353  1010 Bq and only  the 0.662 MeV emission line of the isotope was considered. The other source is a 60Co with the activity of 4.353  1010 Bq and only the energy of 1.17 MeV and 1.33 MeV emission line of the isotope were con- sidered. The source materials are water in both cases. The source is positioned at the origin of coordinates aligned with the axis.
The results from VRBM, CIDEC and MCNP are shown in Table 2. It can be seen that the maximum relative deviation of VRBM to the result of CIDEC is 1.2%, and most of the deviations are less than 1.0%, proving the accuracy of the VRBM. Furthermore, the deviation of the results of MCNP is less than 10.0% in the test, except in the case of 60Co with the calculated position of (50, 0, 0) cm and the maximum devia- tion of 10.7%.
4.2.2.Shielding case
To further assess the performance of VRBM in shielding case, a 20
20 2 cm cubic source positioned in the origin of coordinates aligned with the axis and located in a room ﬁlled with air was used. The source is a 137Cs with the activity of 4.353 1010 Bq, and only the 0.662 MeV emission line of the isotope was considered. The source is distributed in the air. The shielding materials used in the test were water and lead. Both the thin layer (0.2 cm) and thick layer (2.0 cm) were considered in the materials. The shielding was placed in the x-axes, 5 cm away from the source surface. The calculated positions are in the x-axes 20, 50,  100 cm away from the origin respectively.
Table 3 presents the results of VRBM, CIDEC and MCNP. It can be observed that the maximum relative deviation of VRBM to the result of CIDEC is 2.4%, and most of the deviations are less than 1.0%. The maximum relative deviation of VRBM to the results of MCNP is 11.7%, and most of the deviations are less than 10.0%. The results show ac- ceptable correlation with the results of the CIDEC and MCNP.
Fig. 9.  Basic geometries modeling snapshots. In each snapshot, the object is in the middle, and the left model (the upper in (f)) is the model of RGMB, and the right model (the below in  (f)) is the model of FGMS. The boundary voxels are shown in red wireframe, and the internal voxels are shown in blue. The surfaces generated by FGMS are shown in black. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
We also observe that all diﬀerences between the method of VRBM and CIDEC in the same direction in the case of (A) and (B) have almost the same value. The reason for this phenomenon is that both of the two methods are based on the Point-Kernel method; however VRBM uses the sampling strategy to generate point kernels while CIDEC generates point kernels by randomly selecting the grids that inside the volume. As a result, they have diﬀerent point kernels sets to calculate the dose rate, which causes their dose results to be slightly diﬀerent and the devia- tions in the same direction are similar, however the diﬀerence is small.
4.2.3.Surface source case
To verify the eﬀectiveness of the VRBM in the surface source case, a cylindrical surface source of 137Cs with a radius of 10 cm and a height of 50 cm was used. The activity of the radiation source is 5.0 1010 Bq and only the 0.662 MeV emission line of the isotope was considered. The geometry of the source is shown in Fig. 10. The source is dis- tributed in the air, and the calculation positions are 30, 50,  100 cm away from the center of the source. The results of VRBM are only compared with that of MCNP because the method of CIDEC can’t deal with the surface source.
The modeling snapshot of the surface source was shown in Fig. 11. It can be seen that the VRBM successfully gets the geometry for surface source, proving the eﬀectiveness of the VRBM in modeling the surface source.
Table 4 presents the results of VRBM and MCNP in the surface
source case. It can be seen that the relative deviation of VRBM's model to the area of real model is 1.1%. The maximum relative deviation of VRBM to the dose rate results of MCNP is 12.8%. The results also show acceptable correlation with the results of MCNP in the surface source case.
4.2.4.Backscattering case
A geometry in which backscattering is signiﬁcant was used to dis- cuss the performance of the proposed method, and  it  is  shown  in Fig. 12. A point source of 60Co was positioned in a hollow concrete parallelepiped (density = 2.3 g/cm3). The source is located at the center of the left surface of the parallelepiped, and the distance between the source and the left inner surface is 5 cm. The activity of the source is
4.0 1010 Bq and only the energy of 1.17 MeV and 1.33 MeV emission line of the isotope were considered. The result of VRBM was compared with that derived from MCNP.
Table 5 presents the results of VRBM and MCNP in the back- scattering case. It can be observed that the relative deviation of VRBM to the results of MCNP is signiﬁcant due to the backscattering eﬀect (Knoll, 2000). The closer to the corner, the higher of the relative de- viation of VRBM to the results of MCNP, and the maximum relative deviation is 26.9%. The reason for this phenomenon is that the VRBM only considers the directed radiation and disregards the backscattering eﬀect. In the volumes surrounding case, the exposure rate at a given position due to scattered radiation can be larger than that caused by
Table 1
Dimensions and modeling results of basic shapes.
Table 2
Results from VRBM, CIDEC and MCNP in no shielding case.
directed radiation. Therefore the deviation of VRBM to MCNP in the backscattering case is commonly higher than that in the case that the backscattering eﬀect is not signiﬁcant. The experiment also shows the deviation of VRBM to MCNP is less than 30% which almost re- presentatives the worst case of the VRBM.
4.2.5.Comparison with measured data
To compare dose rate results of VRBM with measured data, a real nuclear waste cylindrical dump from a nuclear power plant was mod- eled. The measured data from Vela (2006) were used to verify the ef- fectiveness of the method in this paper. The benchmark case is that a homogeneous radioactive concentration was assumed and distributed in the solid concrete volume contained in the dump. Dimensions, ac- tivity and isotopic concentration are as shown in Table 6. Dose rates were measured at the dump surface at mid-height. The dump was supposed to be in the origin and the calculation coordinate was (30, 0,
43) cm.
The calculated results of VRBM and CIDEC and measurement data were shown in Table 7. As expected from the analysis of Section 4.2, the deviations of VRBM from CIDEC are all less than 1.0%, while the maximum deviation to measured data is 2.23%. Though the lack of rigor is the inherent shortcoming of the Point-Kernel method, it can also provide fairly good results for gamma radiation.
5.Discussion
In this paper, we present a ﬂexible dose assessment method ap- plicable in the process of cutting and the demolition tasks during the decommissioning of nuclear facilities. Compared with the existing methods, the advantage of the method presented in this paper is that it shows a better performance in the modeling of arbitrary geometries and gamma radiation sources automatically. In addition, the approximate
Fig. 10. The case of cylindrical surface source.
Fig. 11. The cylindrical surface modeling snapshot. The object is in the left, and the right model is generated by VRBM. The boundary voxels are shown in red wireframe. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
process can still be performed without having the full knowledge of the speciﬁc shape of the object. Furthermore, point kernels are generated by sampling the volume voxel or the split plane, which makes the
Table 3
Results from VRBM, CIDEC and MCNP in shielding case.
Table 4
Results from VRBM and MCNP in surface source case.
Fig. 12. Volumes surrounding case with signiﬁcant backscattering eﬀect.
Table 5
Results from VRBM and MCNP in backscattering case.
Table 6
Dimensions and isotopic composition of the simulated NPP waste dump.
Table 7
Comparison of measurement data with calculated results of VRBM and CIDEC.
modeling more ﬂexible. However, it was observed that the method presented in this paper may cause higher errors at edges and corners if the split threshold is large, as in the parallelepiped edges and corners, etc. Moreover, because uniform distribution of point kernels was ap- plied, the number of point kernels will increase rapidly with increase in the density of point kernels, although increment in kernel density re- sults in a good calculation accuracy, it requires more computing time, in addition the distribution is often not homogeneous. Consequently, our next research work will focus on optimizing treatment precision for structural edges and corners, taking the non-homogeneous distribution into account, and developing an uneven sampling method for the generation of point kernels to improve the computation accuracy and eﬃciency.
6.Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a ﬂexible dose assessment method for arbitrary geometries and gamma radiation sources that are common during the cutting and demolition process in the decommissioning of nuclear facilities. This method, in combination with VR tools and CAD tools, can model structures of diﬀerent geometries automatically and has the ability to deal with the scenario where the structure changes frequently.
The geometric modeling results were veriﬁed by simulating basic geometries, which include convex surface, a concave surface, ﬂat sur- face and their combination. Simulation results show that the VR-based
method presented is more ﬂexible, generalizes better, gives a superior
performance and supply detailed information on objects, such as the
volume and contour. More importantly, it is applicable to arbitrarily shaped geometries. The relative error of the modeling volume is less than 2.5% even in a large error situation. Dose calculation results generated with this method were compared with those from CIDEC code, MCNP code and measured data. The results show good correla- tions between our VR-based method and the results from CIDEC, and MCNP and measured data, proving the ﬂexibility and accuracy of the method. One other major advantage of the VR-based method is that it generates result faster and needs less computation time between each calculation compared with MCNP. Therefore, in a situation where time is of the essence, the dose assessment method in this paper is more eﬀective and ﬂexible.
Acknowledgment
This research work was funded by Decommissioning of Nuclear Facilities and Radioactive Waste Management Research, Project sup-ported by the Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province,China (Grant nos. A2016002 and E2015053), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51379046), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. DL13CB14) and the State-Sponsored Program of China Scholarship Council (No. 201506605006).
