<title>Review of the regulatory periodic inspection system from the viewpoint of defense-in-depth in nuclear safety</title>
<Affiliation>BEES Inc., Suite L508, 193 Munji-ro, Yuseong, Daejeon, 34051, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<author>Jihan Lim, Hyungjin Kim, Younwon Park</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2018.07.008</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2018.07.008</URL>
a b s t r a c t
The regulatory periodic safety inspection system is one of the most important methods for conﬁrming the safety of nuclear power plants and the defense in depth in nuclear safety is the most important basic means for accident prevention and mitigation. Recently, a new regulatory technology based on risk- informed and safety performance has been developed and used in advanced countries. However, since the domestic periodic inspection system is being used in the same way over 30 years, it is necessary to know how the inspection contributes to the safety conﬁrmation of the nuclear power plants. In this study, the domestic periodic inspection system currently in use was analyzed from the perspective of defense in depth in nuclear safety. In addition, the analysis results were compared to the U.S. NRC's safety inspection system to obtain consistency and lessons in this study. As a result of analysis, the NRC's safety inspections were distributed almost evenly at the all levels of defense in depth, while in the case of domestic inspection, they were heavily focused on the level 1 of defense in depth. Therefore, it appeared urgent to improve the inspection system to strengthen the other levels of defense in depth in nuclear safety.
Keywords:
Periodic inspection Regulatory inspection Safety inspection Defense in depth
Risk-informed regulation Inspection items
1.Introduction
Accidents at TMI, Chernobyl, and Fukushima nuclear power plants further strengthened nuclear safety-related regulatory sys- tems and raised the need for a comprehensive review of the safety management systems for nuclear power plants. The U.S. NRC adopted a risk-informed and performance based nuclear regulatory system including the concept of defense in depth (DiD) [1] at the end of 1990, and then it spread to regulatory agencies around the world. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) deﬁned DiD as the most important means for the prevention and mitigation of nuclear power plant accidents in Fundamental Safety Principles published in 2006 [2]. Also, the most important lesson of the Fukushima accident in Japan in 2011 was that DiD was the most important factor in nuclear safety. Therefore, in order to secure the safety of nuclear power plants from the viewpoint of reﬂection of lessons learned and operating experience, it is necessary to secure the barriers by incorporating the concept of DID to the nuclear power plant and to conﬁrm whether the barriers about each level of DID are secured. Since then, the Nuclear Regulation Authority, Japan has made major changes to the safety inspection system, and now it is shifting its engineering technology to risk-informed and performance based advanced one including DiD concepts, which is currently used in the U.S. NRC. In Korea, the Nuclear Safety and Security Commission (NSSC) issued a Severe Accident Policy (2001.08), Recommendation of the Risk-Informed Safety Inspection Implementation (2002.12), and Risk-Informed, Performance Based Comprehensive Regulation Plan (2006). The Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety (KINS) conducted an international joint research project Establishment of Advanced and Future-oriented Nuclear Safety Regulatory System [3] from 2007 to 2012. For this, a regu- latory study of Establishment of Implementation Program for Graded Regulation Using Risk and Performance Information [4] was conducted in order to enhance the safety regulation effect, efﬁ- ciency, and overall safety by differentiating regulatory resources and activities based on the performance and design/operational characteristics of the nuclear power plants. Also, a research project by the title of Establishment of Implementation System for Risk Communication based on Nuclear Issues [5] was conducted with the aim of contributing to the promotion of social acceptance of nuclear energy by eliminating the public awareness and informa- tion gap inherent in nuclear conﬂict issues by combining risk
communication with policies. However, due to Korea's inherent regulatory system and environment, regulation on the use of risk information has not yet been put into practical institutionalization except for some limited application.
Regulatory agencies in most countries with nuclear power plants are conducting periodic or regular basis inspections. KINS has recently revised the Periodic Inspection Guideline (Rev. 3, 2015.10) [6] to consider the conditions of site surveillance and determine the target items and methods of regulatory inspection (in other words, periodic inspection, regular inspection, or safety inspection) using risk information. However, these inspection items are speciﬁed and controlled by the law, and the assessment methodology is still a deterministic one with single line defense. Actually, this method was introduced from Japan in early 1980s when the only three nuclear power plants (Kori 1, 2 and Wolsong 1) were operated in Korea and is still being used. It aims to check whether the performance of each inspection items satisﬁes the acceptance status at the time of the Pre-Service Inspection for each facility and system in accordance with Article 35, Enforcement Decree of the Nuclear Safety Act. In other words, the domestic regulatory inspection of nuclear power plants including all the fa- cilities focuses more on conﬁrming readiness for operation rather than conﬁrming safety function. In addition, since all systems and facilities in a plant are subject to inspection, it is inefﬁcient and ineffective to inspect them all with limited regulatory resources during operational phase.
Therefore, it is necessary to improve the regulatory periodic safety inspection system for domestic nuclear power plants. Nowadays, the safety of nuclear power plant draws more public attention than ever before so that the regulatory inspection is recognized as one of the most important safety veriﬁcation tools. As pubic concern on safety increase, two approaches can be taken: one is to tighten regulation and the other is to improve regulatory effectiveness by strengthening DiD measure. The objective of this investigation is to suggest way to improve the effectiveness of pe- riodic safety inspection through three approaches: (1) to compare KINS periodic safety inspection with NRC baseline inspection practices, (2) to evaluate event reports and (3) to review pre- liminary initiating events.
2.A methodology to estimate the regulatory inspection system
2.1.Estimation method
Fig. 1 shows the estimation procedure. This method focuses on conﬁrming safety in terms of level of DiD and each cornerstone in
U.S. NRC Reactor Oversight Process (ROP) [10], rather than focusing on checking whether the nuclear power plant can be operated through periodic inspections. For this method to be effective in practice, it is necessary to match 1) inspection objectives of items and detailed sub-items for the target facility and 2) design objec- tives of the structure, system, and component (SSC) included in the target item with the objectives and functions required in each level of DiD and cornerstone in ROP.
Ultimately, this approach allows us to see how the current pe- riodic inspection items are distributed in terms of levels of DiD in nuclear safety (and additionally in terms of cornerstones in the ROP) and thus to identify vulnerabilities in safety veriﬁcation.
In order to classify all SSC included in the facilities subject to periodic inspection according to the design purpose, function and safety level, Final Safety Analysis Report (FSAR) 3.2 “System Quality Classiﬁcation” [11] and the Maintenance Rule (MR) (10 CFR 50.65 “Requirements for Monitoring the Effectiveness of Maintenance at Nuclear Power Plants”) [12] were used. The MR provides criteria for
Fig. 1. An analysis method for deriving vulnerability of periodic inspection from the view point of defense in depth.
the management scope of nuclear power plant based on SSC, and NRC Reg. Guide 1.160 [13] that is the regulatory guidelines for the implementation of MR provides an alternative to determine the management scope by function. This is an important issue that determines whether the criteria should be classiﬁed as a facility or a function. First, an analysis of the DiD perspective was conducted, followed by an analysis of the ROP Cornerstone perspective. The latter is to conﬁrm the consistency of the analysis, linking the purpose of each cornerstone with the concept of each level of DiD and matching the analysis results of the DiD perspective analyzed earlier. For example, periodic inspection items identiﬁed as level one of DiD can be classiﬁed as “Initiating Events”, “Barrier Integ- rity”, “Occupational Radiation Safety”, and “Public Radiation Safety” by overlapping items, the identiﬁed items as level two of DiD were classiﬁed as “Initiating Events” only. The U.S. regulatory system has been developed based on operating experiences and R&D results accumulated over the years. This system been considered as the most reliable and robust in most of nuclear countries in the world. Therefore, valuable insights can be obtained from comparative approach on the inspection methodologies between NRC's baseline inspection where the DiD concept is well incorporated and KINS's Periodic safety inspection that was no visible DiD concept.
2.2.Periodic inspection model
2.2.1.KINS model
Regulatory inspections of domestic nuclear power plants are carried out on the basis of Article 22 (Inspection) of Nuclear Safety Act [7]. As referred to in this law, all nuclear power plants must be operated in compliance with the operating license in accordance with Article 21 (Standards for License) of the Nuclear Safety Act, and the performance of each facility and system must maintain standard status at the time of Pre-Service Inspection in accordance with Article 35 (Regular Inspection) of the Enforcement Decree of the Nuclear Safety Act [8]. Periodic inspection is to conﬁrm this. According to this law system, the standards for license of regulatory inspection are focused on maintaining the performance for normal operation of all systems in a nuclear power plant, and ultimately preventing disaster caused by nuclear reactor or radioactive ma- terial under the conditions of operation as well. This, in a legal context, seems to be well consistent with the 8th Principles (“All practical efforts must be made to prevent and mitigate nuclear or radiation accidents”) of the IAEA Fundamental Safety Principles, No. SF-1 [2]. In Article 19 (Periodic Inspection) of the Enforcement Regulations for the Nuclear Safety Act [9], the periodic inspection period is deﬁned as the term from the day when the reactor is stopped for the purpose of refueling until the day when full power operation is resumed. If the inspection result satisﬁes the standards of Article 21 of the Nuclear Safety Act, it is stipulated that the reactor criticality is allowed. Table 1 shows the legal system for periodic inspections of domestic nuclear power plants.
In particular, Article 19 (Periodic Inspection) of the Enforcement Regulations for the Nuclear Safety Act stipulates that the inspection target items and methods for each facility shall be prescribed in the NSSC's notiﬁcation. According to this, the NSSC Notice No. 2017-09
[14] speciﬁes eleven facilities including the Other Facilities Per- taining to the Safety of a Nuclear Reactor (OFPSNR) Facility and one operational technical capability ﬁeld for regulatory inspections as shown in Table 2. The OFPSNR Facility is deﬁned in detail in NSSC Notice No. 2016-30 [15] Article 2. The total number of inspection target items was 100 and the total number of detailed inspection items was 322 on the basis of the facility-speciﬁc checklist of the Periodic Inspection Guideline [6].
2.2.2.U.S. NRC model
The U.S. NRC operates a regulatory framework called Reactor Oversight Process (ROP) [10] which is a tiered approach to assessing performance indicators and utilizing risk information to inspect, measure and evaluate the safety and security of nuclear power plants. As shown in Fig. 2, this system has three key strategic per- formance areas of nuclear safety, radiation safety and safeguard to protect the health and safety of the public from nuclear power plants. Within each area, there are cornerstones that reﬂect the essential safety aspects of facility operation. It provides a means to collect information about licensee performance, assess the infor- mation for its safety signiﬁcance, and provide for appropriate license and NRC response (Fig. 3). There are a total of seven cornerstones in the ROP framework, each of which has a goal in Table 3. The ROP has a principle that when a regulator guarantees that a company meets the safety objectives of each of these seven cornerstones, the regu- lator's goal of ensuring the safety of the nuclear power plants (ensuring public health and safety) is achieved. Table 3 summarizes intentions and goals that are included in the seven cornerstones.
The NRC's regulatory inspection comparable to the domestic periodic inspection is a risk-informed baseline inspection. This in- spection program is an integral part of the NRC's ROP and supports the goals and objectives of that process. This program is comprised of three parts. They are cornerstone-based inspections, veriﬁcation of performance indicators, and identiﬁcation and resolution of problems. Baseline inspection can be divided into Resident
Inspection and Region Based Inspection depending on the inspector performing this inspection: the former by resident in- spectors and the latter by region-based inspectors. Under the baseline inspection program, all areas where there is a need to evaluate a licensee's performance are deﬁned as inspectable areas. Inspections within these areas were adjusted where licensee per- formance to meet a cornerstone objective is adequately gauged by performance indicators. In baseline inspection, as shown in Table 4, a total of 41 inspectable areas are designated for seven cornerstones and related inspection procedures are developed and implemented. This presents a listing of inspectable areas associated with each cornerstone of safety.
3.Applications and results
3.1.Characteristics of domestic periodic inspection system from the viewpoint of DiD in nuclear safety
In order to understand the extent to which the detailed items to be inspected contributes to the safety veriﬁcation of the nuclear power plant based on the KINS's Regulatory Inspection Guideline [6], which is the purpose of the regulatory inspection, the results of mapping and re-grouping them into each level of DiD in nuclear safety are shown in Table 5 below. The regulatory inspection items projected by the level of DiD are 417 in total if they allow over- lapping items depending on the functions that are suitable for the purpose of each level of DiD in nuclear safety. Fig. 4 shows the distribution of the safety inspections for each target facility to be inspected, with 112 in the OFPSNR facility, followed by 58 in the Power Supply System Facilities and the third 45 items in the Power Conversion System Facilities. A total of 215 items were distributed in these three facilities, accounting for 51.56% of all items. As shown in Fig. 5, the distribution of safety veriﬁcation in DiD levels is 58.8% in the level one, 17.0% in the level two, 20.4% in the level three, and 3.8% in the level four respectively. It is because most periodic in- spections are concentrated on the SSCs included in the Radioactive Waste Disposal Facilities, Radiation Control Facilities, and Power Conversion System Facilities, and OFPSNR Facility, which include most of the SSCs for DiD level one that are not dependent on or affect engineered safety features actuation system (ESFAS) and mitigating systems for design based accidents or severe accidents. In addition to the prevention of the early events (associated with DiD level 1) according to the lessons of the Fukushima accident, preparations for abnormal or even more situations such as tran- sient (associated with DiD level 2), design basis accidents (associ- ated with DiD level 3), and severe accidents (associated with DiD level 4) must be made to secure safety. As a measure of this lesson, the current domestic regulatory inspection system, concentrated in the level 1 of DiD, seems to be far from securing the safety of the nuclear power plant.
Table 1
Legal system concerning periodical inspections of domestic nuclear power plants.
Table 2
Items subject to regulatory inspection of domestic nuclear power plants.
Fig. 2.  U.S. NRC reactor oversight process  framework.
Fig. 3.  Overview of the reactor oversight  process.
Table 3
Objectives of the cornerstones in ROP framework.
Table 4
Inspectable areas in baseline inspection program [19].
The type analysis of inspection ﬁndings noted for the periodic inspection items listed in Table 2 provides information on how the actual inspection activity contributes to the comprehensive nuclear safety veriﬁcation of the current periodic inspection. Table 6 shows the types of inspection ﬁndings noted (including recommenda- tions) in  the  Regulatory  Inspection  Reports  of  Hanul  Unit  5  (1st ~ 8th inspections) and Hanul Unit 6 (1st to 8th inspections) [16,17]. According to this analysis results, about 27.5% of the in- spection ﬁndings noted are related to OFPSNR Facilities, about 17.4%
are in the Power Supply System Facilities, about 13.8% in the Power Conversion System Facilities, and 11.9% were in the Radioactive Waste Disposal Facilities. These facilities accounted for about 70.6% of the all inspection ﬁndings noted. Looking at the inspection re- sults noted, procedural nonconformity that is classiﬁed as human error accounts for about 42.2% of the total inspection ﬁndings. The type analysis of inspection ﬁndings noted for the periodic inspec- tion items are shows, like the results of mapping and re-grouping detailed inspection items into each level of DiD, the current
Table 5
The analysis results of regulatory inspection items in DiD perspective.
Fig. 4. The distribution of inspection items in DiD perspective (by facility).
domestic regulatory inspection system seems to be far from securing the safety of the nuclear power plant. In fact, it is not unreasonable for periodic inspections to appear to be very formal
and ineffective without contributing signiﬁcantly to safety veriﬁ- cation, because these facilities include inspection items that do not contribute to, or even contribute to, anything except DiD level 1 but
Fig. 5. The distribution of inspection items in DiD perspective (total).
dominate, and their inspection activities are not focused on safety veriﬁcation.
3.2.Characteristics of domestic periodic inspection system from the viewpoint of ROP cornerstones
Table 7 shows the results of analyzing the 41 items of the NRC baseline inspection and the domestic regulatory inspection items
from the seven cornerstones view of the NRC ROP framework. Domestic periodic inspection items were mapped by allowing overlapping items for each purpose by seven cornerstones. Fig. 6 shows a comparison of regulatory inspection items between KINS and NRC. The NRC baseline inspection items were relatively highly classiﬁed as mitigating systems associated with the level 3 of DiD in nuclear safety, while the domestic items were mainly distributed at a high rate of 42.6% in Initiating Event associated with the level 1 and 2 of DiD. This result also shows almost the same pattern as before. It should be noted that the NRC baseline inspection items are almost evenly distributed throughout the cornerstones. In particular, the fact that security has a higher distribution after the mitigating system suggests a something important to us.
4.Review and discussion
The inspection target selection method between NRC baseline inspection and domestic regulatory inspection shows a signiﬁcant difference. The selection method of NRC baseline inspection follows a systematic ROP regulatory framework. The selection processes for NRC baseline inspection focus to accomplish the objectives for each cornerstone, and are shown in IMC 2515 Appendix A [18]. The se- lection processes for NRC baseline inspection speciﬁes the range of sub-items so that the item selection for inspection target is possible depending on the property of the applicable nuclear power plants. And the target item inspection procedure in accordance to the
Table 6
The analysis results of regulatory inspection ﬁndings noted for Hanul Unit 5&6.
Table 7
Comparison of the regulatory inspection items between NRC and KINS.
Fig. 6. The distribution of inspection items in cornerstones perspective.
cornerstone and inspectable area correlation is developed. On the contrary, since domestic regulatory inspection is executed to satisfy the performance and operability of plant facility by law, it must establish the selection criteria for target facility and SSC in it to inspect the performance of disaster prevention of radiation mate- rial. Consequently, the target items and sub-items will be speciﬁed by the type of reactor; where the complete inspection should be followed for each target item. Therefore, the regulatory agency has developed the inspection guidelines according to it. In Table 8, the
comparison between NRC baseline inspection Program and do- mestic regulatory inspection system is shown. Overall, NRC base- line inspection conﬁrms the plant safety performance by speciﬁc plant inspection based on risk information, the inspection pro- cedure is divided into activity units, the inspection procedure en- sures the inspection objectives by showing the relationship between the inspection and ROP cornerstones, and the selection criteria for target items are system approach, risk signiﬁcance and low margin approach, and event scenario approach. On the other
Table 8
Comparison of the regulatory inspection system between NRC and KINS.
hand, the domestic regulatory inspection is executed for the same target item in the single period without considering the charac- teristic features for each plant unit by the type of reactors, the in- spection procedure is divided into facility/system, and the inspection needs to satisfy the objectives of regulatory inspection  to conﬁrm safety since it tends to conﬁrm the performance status during overhaul and in-service inspection.
In addition, although the regulatory periodic inspection is the most important activity to conﬁrm the safety of nuclear power plants, the domestic regulatory inspection is executed from the perspective of conﬁrming the performance of all systems stipulated in the law rather from the DiD perspective in nuclear safety. In this manner, the current inspection method puts the same degree of importance on every system and does not consider the degree of importance of safety on each level of DiD. Therefore, in order to improve the availability and effectiveness of regulatory resources, it is essential to provide change to the current domestic regulatory inspection system. An example of the change is to exclude some items with insigniﬁcant impact on safety from the DiD perspective, such as OFPSNR Facilities and Power Conversion System Facilities.
5.Conclusions
In this study, we have discussed the weakness of the current domestic regulatory inspection system, as well as the need to change the safety conﬁrmation of nuclear power plants from the perspective of DiD in nuclear safety. As a result, further study is required to develop the applicable method. In order to strengthen level 1 of DiD, which means the prevention of any abnormal operation and accident, it is required to ensure whether each cause of individual accidents is inspected accordingly through the current target item by analyzing each accident rather than analyzing con- ventional inspection activity for the existing target item. To do this, it is possible to strengthen the target item by plant units. In order to strengthen the level 2 of DiD for abnormal operation control and failure detection, as well as level 3 of DiD for accident mitigation, it is necessary (1) to examine the event tree that can prevent the core damage from the initial event by utilizing the Level 1 PSA at full power internal event report, (2) to examine the required facility, system, equipment and procedure for the relevant event tree, and subsequently (3) to inspect the SSCs associated with the relevant event tree deﬁned in (1) through periodic safety inspection. Moreover, it is required (1) to examine the system, equipment, and procedure by utilizing the minimal cut set of failure paths, which have a higher contribution to reactor damage among all failure paths, and then (2) to inspect these failure paths through periodic regulatory inspection. As for level 4 of DiD related to severe nuclear
accident mitigation, it is essential (1) to analyze the failure paths which have a higher contribution to the damage path for the containment building by utilizing the Level 2 PSA at full power internal event results, (2) to select the facility, system, equipment, and procedure that cause the damage to the containment building as an inspection item, and then (3) to objectify the paths and sce- narios that could cause damage to the containment building of Level 2 PSA. By executing these requirements, it could strengthen the safety of on-power plant.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Nuclear Safety Research Pro- gram through the Korea Foundation of Nuclear Safety(KoFONS), granted ﬁnancial resource from the Nuclear Safety and Security Commission, Republic of Korea. (No. 1603012)
